of
Y?
Saracen Archery


AN ENGLISH VERSION AND EXPOSITION OF A
MAMELUKE WORK ON ARCHERY
(ca. A.D. 1368)


With Introduction, Glossary, and Illustrations
BY j X


J. D. LATHAM, M.A., D.Phil. (Oxon.) þop


LT. CDR. W. F. PATERSON, R.N.





THE HOLLAND PRESS
LONDON


First published in Great Britain
by The Holland Press Limited
112 Whitfield Street, London, W.1


© 1970 J. D. Latham and W, F. Paterson


prar i B, last line far left, for “one” read “Bone”
P us ei or ustddh read ustéd(h); for munt À
: ie, hs it for sea ei a(h)i read muntahz.

» 166, TY, before “the third” ine- below’
P. 181, line 23, after “Pere?” ee, et "lies below”
P. IB line 33, fice "Pen. musert “dast -al (cf. chang, danbil, &c.)

s 0 tg 3 sé 33 i "
P. 205, lines 11 & I2 from iod, dr "xad. Ea “Raffa | t
a’ n


Printed in Great Britain
by Ebenezer Baylis & Son Ltd
The Trinity Press, Worcester, and London
and bound by Mansell Ltd, London


O on DBD W^ d» V NH


reo oe M m ë ë
^a A V M M OQ

0
CONTENTS


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

1PREFACE

NOTE ON THE TRANSLITERATION AND PRONUNCIATION OF ARABIC WORDS DATES

2
THE DOXOLOGY


THE AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION THE PILLARS OF ARCHERY

3ON BOWS

ON BOWSTRINGS

4ON ARROWS

ON THUMB-GUARDS

5ON THE FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHERY ON GRASPING THE BOW

ON NOCKING

6ON LOCKING AND COUNTING ON DRAWING THE ROW

ON SIGHTING

7ON THE LOOSE

ON THE FOLLOW-THROUGH

8ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK


vi

9
25


27

10
CONTENTS ON SHOOTING THE STIRRUP CROSSBOW FROM HORSEBACK - ON BRACING THE BOW ON
STANDING BEFORE THE TARGET ON FLIGHT SHOOTING THE LIST OF THIRTY-FOUR POINTS ON
FAULTS AND INJURIES TO WHICH ARCHERS ARE EXPOSED ON ADJUSTMENTS REQUIRED BY
DIFFERENT PHYSIQUES THE SYSTEMS OF THE GREAT MASTERS OF ARCHERY


ON THE ARCHER'S NEED TO RECOGNIZE HIS FAULTS AND KNOW THE CORRECT USE OF HIS
ARMS

11
MISCELLANEOUS TECHNIQUES AND DEVICES

ON SHOOTING WITH AN ARROW-GUIDE

12ON THE PROCEDURES, CONDUCT, AND PRINCIPLES TO BE OBSERVED BY A NOVICE ON THE
DUTIES AND QUALITIES OF A MASTER AND TEACHER


APPENDIX I Weights and Measures APPENDIX 2 The Bow: Terminology APPENDIX 3
Arrows; Terminology APPENDIX 4 Finger-reckoning APPENDIX 5 ‘The Reconstruction
of Taybugha’s Bow APPENDIX 6 Qabaq and Oiehaj GUIDE TO ENGLISH TECHNICAL
TERMINOLOGY ARABIO-ENGLISH GLOSSARY NOTES AND REFERENCES INDEX OF SUBJECTS

13OF PLACES AND PEOPLE

OP TECHNICAL TERMS


ILLUSTRATIONS

14
à PLATES Frontispiece : Bahram Gir hunting ( Between pp. 136 and 137) PLATE ONE
' Ornamental bookplate - PLATE TWO Turkish flight bows PLATE THREE Ambassador
presenting bows to Akbar PLATE FOUR Portrait of Hulagu PLATE FIVE Bowstring
loop-knots PLATE SIX Arrowheads PLATE SEVEN Thumb-rings PLATE EIGHT The draw of
‘69° and the grip of ‘30’ PLATE NINE Gold finger-tips PLATE TEN The Sasanid
Nishirvin displaying his prowess PLATE ELEVEN Mounted archers engaging defenders
on a wall PLATE TWELVE Mounted archer


PLATE THIRTEEN
PLATE FOURTEEN
PLATE FIFTEEN
PLATE SIXTEEN
PLATE SEVENTEEN
PLATE EIGHTEEN

15
"E e O co] anaw n n E


Sultan Murad 11 shooting at the gabag Mounted archers using the jarmaki
technique Georgians shooting at the mast

16Archers attacking a fort

Korean arrow-guide Reproduction of Mameluke bow

17
. FIGURES `


Thumb loose

18Composite bows

Crossbows

19Crossbow nut

Parts of a composite bow

20Grip of an Indo-Persian bow Wooden core of.a composite bow


. Methods of splicing

21
Wooden core with horn applied Siyah of a Bashkir bow:


Cord and pulley

22
Weighing abow Bowstring loop-knots


— = 04 io a eRe Bou Bal T:

23
viii ILLUSTRATIONS


Figure Page 14 Arrow shafts 2 I$ Arrowheads and nocks 25 16 Parts of a feather
32 17 Thum 35 18 Parts of the hand 4 19 Grasps on the bow 43 20 The ‘Falcon’s
Talons’ 44 21 Nocking 47 22 Locking and counting 52 23 Sasanid lock 53 24
Aiming: ‘inside’ and ‘outside’ 59 25 Aiming: external 62 26 The follow-through
79 27 Shooting rearwards from horseback 74 28 Shooting from horseback 81 29
Drawing-strap 85 30 Crossbow with retaining-clip 87 3I Bracing: military method
91 32 Bracing: on horseback 92 33 Bracing: in squatting position 93 34 Bracing:
with an assistant 93 35 Bracing-board 94 36 Bracing a stiff bow 95 37 Bracing
with drawing-strap 95 38 Bracing: Assyrian archer 97 39 Bracing: Scythian archer
98 40 The siper 107 41 Twisting the thumb 120 42 Stance: oblique and square 123
43 Drawing: oblique and square 124 44 Grasps: square and oblique 128 45 Methods
of the Masters 131 46 Shooting when wearing a helmet 133 47 Razor- and nockless
arrows 139 48 Egg-and-pellet 140 49 Shah Mijrat 145 so ‘Long-nosed’ guide 146 51
Stirrup-guide 147 52 Arrow-guide — . 008.  53 Slotted guide 150 54 The bow:
terminology 162 55 Parts of an arrow | 165 56 Finger-reckoning 1 to 9 l 168 57
Finger-reckoning (tens) 10 to 90 169

24
MAP OF PLACES AND PEOPLES 38.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

25
It is a pleasant duty to acknowledge all those who have assisted us in any way
in our preparation of this book. On the practical and technical side we must,
first and foremost, mention Mr. M. T.  Hallam for the special bow which he so
kindly and skilfully constructed to enable us to apply the acid test of field
trials to our Mameluke writer’s instructions. Without this bow, which has
sturdily stood up to deliberate misuse and violent treatment for more than four
years, many technical problems may never have been solved. Hardly less great is
our debt to Mr. E: McEwen whose knowledge of Oriental composite bow design he
patiently combined with his experience as a craftsman to prove by a first-class
reconstruction that Taybugh3's specifications for the best Mameluke bow of his
day were indeed realistic. For practical advice on mounted archery, cavalry
techniques, and equestrian matters generally, we are indebted to Colonel
G. S. Courtney, 0.B.£., and Mrs. Barbara Low. Valuable comments and suggestions
on the technical aspects of archery have been made by many others with whom we
have discussed our subject and, although we hesitate to single out names, we
feel that it would be an injustice not to express especial thanks to
Messrs. J. Flinton, G. F. Glover, E. G. Heath, D. S. Skinner, J. R. Wiggins, and
Dr. D. J. F. Hii

On the Arabic and Islamic side our greatest debt is to Professor
C. F. Beckingham, Head of the Department of the Near and Middle East, School of
Oriental and African Studies, University of London, who has very generously
devoted a good deal of his valuable time to reading our typescript and making
corrections and constructive criticism. It goes without saying that none of our
errors are his—or indeed anyone else's—responsibility. In matters of weights and
measures we acknowledge with gratitude the advice and assistance of Professor W,
Hinz of Góttingen University; for resolving certain palacographical problems we
are grateful to Dr. S. M.  Stern of All Souls College, Oxford; for valuable
suggestions and advice on points of detail we owe particular debts to Professors
D. Ayalon, A. F. L. Beeston, J. A. Boyle, the late V. Minorsky, J. Robson,
J. Schacht, and Drs. H. H. Al-Hamdani, A. A. Kafrawy, M. Mowafy.

26For permitting us to utilize manuscript materials and providing us with
photostats, micro- films, and reproductions we express sincere thanks firstly to
the British Museum and members of its staff, notably Dr. M. Lings and
Messrs. G. Meredith-Owens and R. H. Pinder-Wilson, who have rendered generous
service in many different ways. We next express our gratitude to the Aya Sofya
and Topkapi Saray: libraries (Istanbul), the Bibliothéque Nationale (Paris), the
Bibliotheek der Rijksuniversiteit (Leiden), the Bodleian Library (Oxford),
Cambridge University Library, the Chester Beatty Library (Dublin), Edinburgh
University Library, and Manchester University Library. We must at the same time
thank Mr. W. Brice, Dr. Susan Skilliter, and Professor Beckingham for the time
and trouble they took in seeking out manuscripts and obtaining microfilms for us
during their travels in Turkey and elsewhere.

To Mrs. E. Simon, President of the Society of Archer-Antiquaries, we express our
gratitude for her kindness in granting us access to manuscript notes on
composite bows made by her late husband, Mr. Ingo Simon. Last, but by no means
least, we wish to say how grateful we are to Dr. A. L. S. M. Lutful-Huq and the
University of London for allowing us to consult and utilize his unpublished
edition of the Nzkayat as-su’l.

27
ix


PREFACE

28
Conceived as a contribution to the history of archery, this book is primarily
intended for the toxophilite whose spirit of inquiry carries him beyond the
sphere of archery as a modern sport into the world of the medieval warrior, for
whom the bow was very much more than a pastime.  The hard core pf the book
consists of the translation and exposition of a work in Arabic written less than
a century after the Saracen recapture of Acre. Of major importance for a fuller
under- standing of the weapons, training, techniques, and skill of the
fourteenth-century Mameluke bowman and, in particular, his remarkable dexterity
as a horse archer, the work affords a deeper insight into some technically
significant factors underlying the success of Central Asian military irruptions
into the Middle East. Those interested in Islamic miniatures will welcome the
light it sheds on a number of technical details frequently depicted in the
hunting and battle scenes so dear to the Muslim illuminator, while
lexicographers will perceive from our glossary that it has something to
contribute to existing Arabic dictionaries, The subject matter of the work,
thea, is of more than marginal relevance to Arabic and Islamic studies, and,
this being so, we have considered the needs of the orientalist as well as those
of the archer. To please two groups of persons with such widely differing
backgrounds and interests as those dividing the majority of our readers will not
be easy, and we are only too well aware that we shall satisfy only some of the
people some of the time. Our Arabic-English glossary, for instance, may seem to
the archer to go somewhat beyond his requirements, and, elsewhere in the book,
he may not appreciate the occasional discussion of some Arabic, Persi or Turkish
term. If so, we beg his indulgence and plead the inadequacy of the dictionaries
for the understanding of Mameluke archery literature. For his part, the
orientalist may wish that we had included, say, a study of Taybugha’s sources or
extended the scope and character of the glossary. If so, we plead the
limitations of space which impose the need for priorities. Finally, if to either
party we seem to make points that are elementary in the eyes of the one, it
should be recognized that they are made for the sake of the other. i

The complete absence of any edition of the Arabic text to serve as the basis of
our work necessitated the investigation of a comparatively large number of
manuscripts, For reasons which our introduction makes obvious, the problems they
posed could not be passed over in silence, and they have therefore been the
subject of a discussion which will perhaps be of little direct interest to,the
archer or more general reader, Again, the lack of a published Arabic text and
the existence of a complexity of manuscripts have combined to impose the
necessity of furnishing manuscript references. To remove the distraction which
they might have inflicted if recorded in footnotes, they have been relegated to
the back of the book together with such explanatory motes or supplementary
materials as seemed to us, for one reason or another, to be out of place in the
main body of our work.

29
NOTE ON THE TRANSLITERATION AND PRONUNCIATION OF ARABIC WORDS


In conformity with modern scholarly practice Arabic words and phrases are
transliterated according to a system which will be meaningful to all Arabists
and familiar to most other serious students of Islamic civilization and culture
in the Middle East. The complete layman will be grateful for the following
hints:

30
Short Vowels

a is pronounced as in pat.  i is pronounced as jn fit.  u is pronounced as in
put,

31
Long Vowels

@ is pronounced as in far.

32i is pronounced as ee in sheet.  ñ is pronounced as in knar.


Consonants

33d, &, g, 5, b z are difficult letters and are better pronounced as their nearest
English equivalents, viz. d, h, k (not qu), s, t, z, than as the retching,
spluttering, or choking sounds so often emitted even by tutored students of
Arabic.

dh is pronounced as th in the.

34gh represents a guttural r somewhat like the burred r of Northumbrian English
and northern French.

kh is pronounced as ch in the Scottish loch.

35sh is pronounced as in shout EXCEPT when the second letter is 5, in which case
the two letters are pronounced independently of one another, as, for instance,
in the case of Ishdg (pron.  Iss-hdgq).*

th is pronounced as in thing.

36()is the glottal stop, or a catch of the breath, such as that replacing the z in
Cockney, Glaswegian, and Mancunian pronunciations of water (wa'er), butter
(bwer), etc, It is the sound we hear after n in an ice cream which, if
pronounced without the glottal stop, gives us a nice cream,

Ç) is a strong guttural peculiar to Arabic and not unlike a forceful glottal
stop C) articulated i in the depths of the throat. It is not a vowel.

37
Doubled Consonants. These should be pronounced as such. Thus, tt must be
pronounced not as in better, but as the two rs in cat tails, and shsh as in dish
shelf.


The amne applies V di, M, and h. On occasions A may alao hane: to be prononci
idepeniensly, bu th point need not concern us.

38
xiii


xiv TRAN SLITERATION AND PRONUNCIATION

39
The Arabic Article (al, 1). This is assimilated to a following d, d, dh, n, r,
s, sh, 5, t sth, f, x, #3 Exx.: adh-dhira' (not al-dhird’), ar-radif (not
al-radif). When a i ends in a


vowel, the ‘P form is used, the antecedent vowel replacing the a in al. Thus,
wa-}-bayt, not wa-al-bayt.

40
The Feminine Ending -ah. When followed by a noun in the genitive, the feminine
form i


ending ah becomes-at. Thus *ugdat al-ibham (not 'ugdah al-ibhàm) ‘the joint of
the thumb’. The & is not pronounced and, in fact, many writers omit it

41
In Turkish there are two “i”s, one dotted the other not.


e

42
DATES


Since there are some who may not know that Muslims have their own calendar, we
draw attention to the fact that dates in Muslim Arab sources are normally given
according to the lunar years of the Hegira (hijrah) era (indicated by the
abbreviation A.H.) which is reckoned from 16 July, 4.D. 622. Since it is rare
for a Muslim year to fall wholly within a single Christian solar year, it is not
possible, unless an author specifies the day and month, to indicate which of two
possible Gregorian years is involved. It is for this reason that the reader will
find, for instance, that the Muslim years 764—78 are expressed as
A.H. 764~78/1362-3—1376-7. All dates without any indication to the contrary are
to be taken as A.D., and, where an oblique stroke intervenes between any two
dates, the first is that of the Muslim year.

43
XV -


BIBLIOGRAPHY

44
AND


ABBREVIATIONS (The key to periodical abbreviations will be found in section ii.)

45
i


Acker, W. R. B., Japanese Archery, Rutland, Vt., and Tokyo, 1965. First
published as The Fundamentals of Japanese Archery, Kyoto, 1937.

46Anderson, G. L., “Turkish Archery’, in British Archer, vol. 16,
Dec.-Jan. 1964-5, pp. I50—51.

Arab Archery — Faris, N. A. and Elmer, R. P., Arab Archery, Princeton U.P.,
1945. Translation of an Arabic work with notes, etc.

47Archery ( Badminton) — Longman, C. J., Waldrond, H., and others, Archery ( The
Badminton Library of Sports and Pastimes), London, 1894.

Archery : the Technical Side = Hickman, C. N., Klopsteg, P. E., and Nagler,
F. (eds.), Archery : the Technical Side, N.F.A.A. (privately printed),
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 1947.

48Ascham, R., English Works: Toxophilus, etc., edited by W. A. Wright, Cambridge
U.P., 1904.  First published 1545.

Ayalon, BSOAS = Ayalon, D., ‘Studies on the Structure of the Mamluk Army’, in
BSOAS, vol, XV (Parts I and II), 1953, pp. 203-28, 448~76, and vol. XVI (Part
IIT), 1954, pp. 57-90.

49Ayalon, Gunpowder = Idem, Gunpowder and Firearms in the Mamluk K; ingdom,
London, 1956.

Ayalon, FAOS = Idem, “The Circassians in the Mamlük Kingdom’, in JAOS, vol. 69,
1949, Pp. 135~47-

50Ayalon, Scripta = Idem, ‘Notes on the Furüsiyya Exercises and Games in the
Mamluk Sultanate’, in Studies in Islamic History and Civilization (Scripta
Hierosolymitana, IX), Jerusalem, on

pp. 31-62.

51Asie, D, T e du mamelouk (Oriental Notes and Studies, I} Jerusalem, 1951.

Baer, Guilds = Baer, G., Egyptian Guilds in Modern Times (Oriental Notes and
Studies, 8), Jerusalem, 1964.

52Balfour, JAI = Balfour, H., ‘On the Structure and Affinities of the Composite
Bow’, in FAI, vol, XIX, 1890, pp. 220-50.

Balfour, 7RAI = Idem, “The Archer's Bow in the Homeric Poems’ (Huxley Memocial
Lecture), in FRAI, vol. LI, 1921, pp. 289-309. .

53Bertier, A. de, Cordier, V., and Guglielmini, A., Le tir à l'arc, Patis, 1900.

Beveridge, H., “Oriental Crossbows’ » in Asiatic Quarterly Revicw, vol. 32,
I9II, pp. 344-48.

54Bilson, F., Busan, London, 1965.

Bishop, W. E., ‘On Chinese Archers’ Thumbrings’, in Archery, x vol. 26, no. I1,
Nov. 1954, pp. 10-14, 33-34.

55
xvii


xiv TRANSLITERATION AND PRONUNCIATION

56
The Arabic Article (al, I). This is assimilated to a following d, d, dh, n, r,
s, sh, 5, ty oth, 52,2; Exx.: adh-dhira (not al-dhira’}, ar-radif (not
al-radif). When a preceding word ends in a vowel, the ‘P form is used, the
antecedent vowel replacing the a in al, Thus, ma-/-bayt, not wa-al-bayt.


The Feminine Ending -ah. When followed by a noun in the genitive, the feminine
form ending . "ah becomes-ár. Thus ‘ugdat al-ibhum (not "ugdah al-ibham) ‘the
joint of the thumb’. The à is not pronounced and, in fact, many writers omit it
altogether.

57
In Turkish there are two “is, one dotted the other not.


DATES

58
Since there are some who may not know that Muslims have their own calendar, we
draw attention to the fact that dates in Muslim Arab sources are normally given
according to the lunar years of the Hegira (hijrah) era (indicated by the
abbreviation A.H.) which is reckoned from 16 July, A.D. 622. Since it is rare
for a Muslim year to fall wholly within a single Christian solar year, it is not
possible, unless an author specifies the day and month, to indicate which of two
possible

years is involved. It is for this reason that the reader will find, for
instance, that the Muslim years 764-78 are expressed as
A.H. 764-78/1362-3—1376-7. All dates without any indication to the contrary are
to be taken as A.D., and, where an oblique stroke intervenes between any two
dates, the first is that of the Muslim year.

59
XY -


xviii BIBLIOGRAPHY

60
Blachére, Dict. = Blachére, R., Chouémi, M., and Denizeau, C., Dictionnaire
arabe-frangais- anglais, Paris, 1964—. .

Brockelmann, C., Geschichte der arabischen Literatur, and Supplementbánde, 5
vols., Leiden, 1937-49.

61Browne, W. A., ‘The Thumb Ring in Art’, in FSAA, vol. 2, 1959, PP- 34-37-

Burke, E. H., The History of Archery, London, 1958.

62Busbecq. See Busbequius.

Busbequius, Embassy into Turkey = Busbeog, A. G. de, The Four Epistles of
A. G. Busbequius [Busbecq] concerning his Embassy into Turkey (Translated from
Latin], London, 1694.

63Cahen, BEO = Cahen, C., ‘Un traité d'armurerie composé pour Saladin’, in BEO,
XII, 1947-8 (1948), pp. 103-63. (See Introduction, p. xxxiv)

Chardin, Travels = Chardin, Sir John, Travels in Persia, London, 1927. (Argonaut
Press edn.  Introduction by Sir Percy Sykes.)

64Clover, P. (ed.), Bowman’s Handbook, 3rd edn., Portsmouth, 1955. (Includes as
Pt. I "Technical Notes on Archery’ by W. F. Paterson.)

Dozy, Suppl. = Dozy, R. P. A., Supplément aux dictionnaires arabes, 2 vols.,
Leiden, 1927.

65Edwards, C. B. and Heath, E. G., In Pursuit of Archery, London, 1962. i

EI — The Encyclopaedia of Islam. Edited by M. T. Houtsma, T. W. Arnold, etc., 4
vols., Leiden, 1913-34.

66EI? = The Encyclopaedia of Islam. New Edition. Edited by H. A. R. Gibb,
J. H. Kramers, etc., Leiden-London, 1960- (A to I so far published.)

Elmer, R. P., Target Archery, New York, 1946.

67Elott, M. E., ‘Technique of the Oriental Release’, in Archery, Dec. 1962,
pp. 18-21, 43.

Flinton, J., ‘Musings on the Thumb Ring’, in ¥SAA, vol. 1, 1958, pp. 38-39.

68Gabrieli, F., Muhammad and the Conquests of Islam, London, 1968.

Gaudefroy-Demombynes, M., La Syrie à l'époque des Mamlouks, Paris, 1923.

69Gibb, Sir Hamilton A. R., Mohkammedanism : an Historical Survey, Oxford U.P.,
1964. (Second edn. Reprint.)

Giorgetti, G., Le armi antiche dal 1000 d. C. al 1800 in tre volumi, Milan,
1961. Vol, II—L'arco, la balestra, e le macchine belliche (1964).

70Grimley, G., The Book of the Bow, London, 1958.

Guillaume, A., Islam, 1954. (Penguin book.)

71Hamlin, Archery = Hamlin, H. S., ‘A Study of Composite Bows’, in Archery,
April-Sept. 1948 (in six monthly parts).

Hansard = Hansard, G. A., The Book of Archery, London, 1840.

72Hein, Jsl, = Hein, J., ‘Bogenhandwerk und Bogensport bei den Osmanen nach dem
Auszug der Abhandlungen der Bogenschützen (telpis resáil er-rümát) des Mustafa
Kani ', in LL, XIV, (1925) pp. 289-360, and XV (1926), pp. 1-78, 234-94. (See
Introduction, p. xxxiii.)

Hodgkin, A. E., The Archer’s Craft, London, 1951.

73Huuri, Gesch. = Huuri, K., Zur Geschichte des mittelalterlichen Geschützwesens
aus orientalischen Quellen, Helsinki-Leipzig, 1941. (See Introduction,
p. xxxiv.)

Ton al-Fagih (wrote circa A.D. 903), Kitab al-buldan, ed. M. J. de Goeje,
Leiden, 1885.

74Ibn lyüs (d. 1524), Histoire des Mamlouks circassiens, tome IT ([4.H.] 872-906),
trad. G. Wiet, Cairo, 1945.

Ibn Ilyas, Journal d'un bourgeois du Caire. Translated and annotated by G. Wiet,
2 vols., Paris, 1955-60.

75Isles, F, W., “Turkish Flight Arrows’, in FSAA, vol. 4, 1961, pp. 25-28.

Jahiz, Manágib = al-Jahiz (d. A.D. 869), Mandgib at-Turk, in Tria Opuscula,
ed. G. van Vloten, Leiden, 1903. z

76Kani, Mustafa. Sce Hein.


BIBLIOGRAPHY xix

77
Kitab al-makhsitn jam‘ al-funiin (Anon.), MS Arabe 2,826, Bibliothèque
Nationale, Paris.

Kiopsteg = Klopsteg, P. E., Turkish Archery and the Composite Bow. Second
Edition, Evanston, Tii., 1947. Published by the author. (See Introduction.)

78Latham, J. D. and Paterson, W. F., ‘An Analysis of Arrow-weights in an Islamic
Military Manual’, in FSS, vol. 10, 1965, pp. 253-61.

Lewis, B., The Arabs in History, London, 1966. (Fourth edn.)

79Maqrizi, Khifat == al-Maqrizi (1366-1442), al-Masá'iz va-I-1 tibár ft dhikr
al-khitat wa-l-athar, 4 vols., Cairo, A.H. 1324-26.

Mayer, L. A., Mamluk Costume, Geneva, 1952.

80Modi, J. J., ‘Archery in Ancient Persia’, in RAS (Bombay Branch), vol. 25,
1917-21, pp. 175-36.

Morse, Additional Notes = Morse, E. S., Additional Notes on Arrow Release,
Salem, Mass., 1922.

81Morse, Bull. Essex Inst, = Idem, ‘Ancient and Modern Methods of Arrow Release’,
in Bull, Essex Inst., vol. XVII, 1885, pp. 3-56.

Mukhassas = Ibn Sidah (d. 1026-7), Kitab al-mukhassas, 17 vols., Bulag,
A.H. 1316-21. (The work is an encyclopaedic lexicon of technical terms
classified according to subject.)

82Nihayah = al-Aqsari'i, Muhammad ibn ‘Isa (?: d. 1348). Nihdyat as-su'l
wa-l-umniyyah f> ta'lim a'màl al-furüsiyyah: a critical edition... by
A. L. S. M. Lutful-Huq. Ph.D. thesis, University of London, 1956. (SOAS Thesis
226.)

Partington, J. R., A History of Greek Fire and Gunpowder, Cambridge, 1960.

83Paterson, W. F., ‘The Archers of Islam’, in JESHO, vol. IX, pp. 69-87.

Paterson, W. F., “Thumb Guards’, in ¥SAA, vol. 6, 1963, pp. 14-15.

84Payne-Gallwey, Crossbow =a Payne-Gallwey, Sir Ralph, The Crossbow, London,
1958. The work includes (a) The Crossbow, published London, 1903; (b) Appendix
to the Crossbow, published peo Catapult and Balista and The Turkish Composite


bak aliens Turkish Composite. See preceding.

85Pope, S. T., Bows and Arrows, California U.P, (Berkeley), 1962. (First edn.,
1923.)

Pope, S. T., Hunting with the Bow and Arrow, New York, 1947. (First edn., 1923.)

86Popper, W., Egypt and Syria under the Circassian Sultans (1382-1468), California
U.P., 1955.

Rausing, G., The Bow; Some Notes on its Origin and qe cq aa Lund, 1967.

87Redhouse, Lexicon = Redhouse, J. W., A Turkish and English Lexicon,
Constantinople, 1921.

Reinaud, JA = Reinaud, M., ‘De l'art militaire chez les arabes au moyen ge’, in
JA, 1848, pp.  207-21.

88Ritter, 75]. = Ritter, H., ‘La Parure des Cavaliers und die Literatur über die
ritterlichen Künste’, in I5, XVIII, 1929, pp. 116-54.

Roberts, T., The English Bowman, London, 1801.

89Robinson, H. R., Oriental Armour, London, 1967.

Scanlon, Manual = Scanlon, G, T., A Muslim Manual of War, being Tafrij al-kurüb
fi tadbtr al-hurüb by ‘Umar ibn Ibrahim al-Awsl. Edited and translated, Cairo,
196r.

90Simon, H. Ingo, Manuscript materials, -

Smail, R. C., Crusading Warfare 1097-1793, Cambridge, 1956.

91Sobernheim, Matériaux, 2me partie = Sobernheim, M., Matériaux pour un corpus
inscriptionum arabicarum, 2me partie: Syrie du Nord, Cairo, 1909.

Stein, F. A. H., Archers d'autrefois : archers d'aujourd'hui, Paris, 1925.

92Steingass, F., A Comprehensive Persian-English Dictionary, London, 1930.

Stone, Glossary of Arms and Armor = Stone, G. C., A Glossary of the
Construction, Decoration, and Use of Arms and Armor in All Countries and in All
Times, New York, 1961. (Reprint. First published 1934.)

93
xx BIBLIOGRAPHY


Tabsirah = at-Tarsüsi, Mardi ibn ‘Ali (called Murda by Cahen, BEO, XII),
Tabsirat arbab al- albab ft kayfiyyat an-najdt fi I-kurüb, etc., MS Huntington
264, Bodleian Library, Oxford.  (See Introduction, p. xxxiv.) N.B.: our
references are to the foliation in occidental numerals.

94Telhis. See Hein.

Wadih = at-Tabari, Ahmad ibn ‘Abd Allah (d. 1295), Kitdb al-vádih ft ma'rifat
"ilm ar-ramy, MS Or. 9454, British Museum.

95Wadih, Ist.: As above. Istanbul MS Veliyüddin Ef. 3175. (See Ritter, Isl.,
XVIII, 1929, p. 136, item ‘Welieddin 3175'.)

Waley, A., Chinese Poems, London, 1946.

96Willcox, R., ‘Something about the Thumb Ring’, in TAM, Nov. 1962, pp. 16-17.

Williams, E. C., Across Persia, London, 1907.

97Yadin, Y., The Art of Warfare in Biblical Lands (translated by M. Pearlman),
London, 1963.

Ya'qübi, ee ibn Abi Ya'qüb (d. after A.D. 891), Kitab al-buldan, ed. M. J. de
Gocje, Leiden, 1892.

98Zajączkowski, A., Mamelucko-turecka wersja arabskiego trakatu o lucznictwie
z. XIV w.in Rocznik orientalistycany, XX (1956).


PERIODICAL ABBREVIATIONS

99
Archery, Palm Desert, Calif., U.S.A. (Monthly.)

Asiatic Quarterly Review, London.  BEO = Bulletin d' Érudes Orientales de
l'Institut Francais de Damas, Beirut.  Bow and Arrow, Covina, Calif.,
U.S.A. (Bi-monthly.)

100British Archer, The, Portsmouth. (Bi-monthly.) !

BSOAS - Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of
London.  Bull, Essex Inst. = Bulletin of the Essex Institute.

101Il. = Der Islam, Berlin.

JA = fournal Asiatique, Paris,

102JAI — Fournal of the Anthropological Institute, London. See also RAI.

FAOS = Fournal of the American Oriental Society, Yale U.P., New Haven,
Connecticut, U.S.A.  jESHO = Fournal of the Economic and Social History of the
Orient, Leiden.

103JRAI = Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute PAPAE (SCRI JAD), London.

FRAS = Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, London.

104JSAA = Journal of the Society of Archer-Antiquaries, London.

YSS = Journal of Semitic Studies, University of Manchester.

105Phoenix, The: Journal of the Classical Association of Canada, Toronto.

Rocenik orientalistyceny, Warsaw,

106TAM = The Archer’s Magazine, Boyertown, Pa., U.S.A.


xxi

107
INTRODUCTION


t. HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

108
The rise of Islam and the rapid growth of the Arab Empire in the wake of
conquests in Asia, Africa, and Europe need not detain us. The vital role of
Persian and Turkish influences in the history of archery in the Middle East
makes it more appropriate to begin with the overthrow, in A.D. 750, of the
Umayyad Caliphate by the Abbasids and the transfer of the capital from Damascus
to Baghdad where the latter first ruled (763-945) and then reigned as puppets
until the fall of Baghdad in 1258.! With the advent of the Abbasids and the
growth of Baghdad, whose position along the main trade routes to Central Asia
favoured eastward expansion, new influences from the Iranian cultural orbit
penetrated the fabric of the Empire, On the military side—our central
interest—the Arab warrior class gradually lost its importance and Khorasanians
(in the regional sense of the term) formed the core of the army until displaced,
from the reign of al-Mu'tasim (833~42) onwards, by Turkish slave troops.* The
courage and martial prowess of these new ele- ments evoked the admiration of
contemporaries who have left impressive accounts of their skill as bowmen and
horse-archers. From the renowned Arab writer, al-Jahiz (776-869) we glimpse
something of the Khorasanians’ military training in which, amongst other things,
boys practised vaulting on to horses’ backs and men played polo, after which
came ‘shooting at the sitting quarry, the hoop [birjäs: below, p. 83] and the
bird on the wing’.* Of the Turks, he writes that ‘if a thousand of their horse
join battle and let off a single bout of arrows, they can mow down a thousand
[Arab] horse. No army can withstand this kind of assault. The Khirijites
[Arabian religious extremists hostile to the Abbasids] and the Beduin have no
skill worth mentioning in shooting from horseback, but the Turk can shoot at
beasts, birds, hoops, men, sitting quarry, dummies, and birds on the wing, and
do so at full gallop to fore or to rear, to left or to right, upwards or
downwards, loosing ten arrows before the Khárijite can nock one.'* In flight, he
adds, the Turk spelt certain death since he was as accurate in retreat as
attack.® To Ibn al-Fagih the Turks were skilled shots who could hit the pupil of
an eye,* and in al-Ya'qübi, who interest- ingly records that their arrows were
made of bone, we can readily detect an implicit recognition of their skill.”

The advent of the Seljuqs and the creation of the Great Sultanate in 1055
finally established the power of the Turks. During the Great Sultanate, which
lasted about a century, they were no longer a class of slave or freed troops,
and the period is marked by the occurrence of a new and important phenomenon in
Middle Eastern history, namely, the westward migration of whole clans of free
Turkmens.*

109The Mongol conquest of Baghdad by Hulagu (Hüle'ü) in 1258 brought the Caliphate
in Iraq to an end. In Egypt and Syria events took a different turn. At the end
of the twelfth century the two countries had been welded by Saladin, the
Ayyübid, into a powerful state based on military strength and capable of
combating the Crusaders.* The régime founded by the Ayyübids became the
inheritance of the Mamelukes who rose to power through the military policy of
as-Salih Ayyüb (1240-49). Recruiting vast numbers of Turks from the Kipchak
steppe and sur- rounding regions, he created from amongst them the Bakriyyah
regiment, an élite guard of nearly


xxnt

110
xxiv INTRODUCTION


1,000 horsemen, whose formation led to the creation of the Mameluke sultanate
which in 1261 established a nominal Abbasid Caliphate in Cairo.

111During the first Mameluke period (1250-1382), commonly, but incorrectly, termed
Bahri from the name of the regiment, the Kipchaks predominated.^, It was they
who, under the command of Baybars at “Ayn Jalit signally defeated the Mongols in
pitched battle (1260) and checked their advance into Syria and Egypt.!! It was
during this first period, as Ayalon has shown," that the maydān, or
training-ground, so essential for systematic drill and intensive training in the
arts of war, flourished as never before or after. At its peak under Baybars I
(1260-77), Mameluke training slowly but surely began to deteriorate, though, we
suspect, much more slowly in Syria than Egypt.!? The role of the bow in all this
was probably much greater than commonly appre- ciated by the orientalist, for in
AH. 733 (1332-3) the sultan an-Nàsir Muhammad ibn Qalaün, probably fearing the
strength of his amirs’ troops, ordered the demolition of archery ranges built by
the amirs outside Cairo, closed dundug-makers’ (meaning probably in this context
crossbow- makers)!* shops, and forbade the production of practice arrows. The
prohibition extended to the whole Mameluke sultanate.1® After this ruler's death
rot set in, and the very first symptom of decay appeared when al-Ashraf Sha'bàn
(4.4. 764—78/1362-3—1376-7) tried to arrest the process by favouring and
encouraging military experts such as our author, Taybughá. His efforts were in
vain. The Circassian sultanate! established by Barqüq (1382-99) accelerated the
downward trend. Generally speaking, training became more perfunctory, discipline
lax, and adult relatives of the Circassian Mamelukes imported from the Caucasus
began to infiltrate the corps without passing through the military school.1?

The skill of Mameluke archers in their heyday is legendary, and even after the
advent of firearms the bow was not hastily cast aside; for not only was it quite
some time before any kind of firearm was as effective as the bow but, as Ayalon
so penetratingly observes, "To equip a soldier with an arquebus meant taking
away his bow and, what was to the Mamluk more dis- tasteful, depriving him of
his horse, thereby reducing him to the humiliating status of a foot soldier,
compelled either to march or to allow himself to be carried in an ox-cart."!5 In
their cyes the importance of the bow was such that in the period of decline
failure to pass tests in its use was used as the criterion for stopping the
privileges of members of the non-Mameluke socio-military unit of the Halgah!* to
which were attached the sons of amirs and Mamelukes debarred by the
non-hereditary system of their society from making a career in the corps.??

112One point remains to be made for the benefit of those unfamiliar with the
history of the Middle East. The military servitude of the Mamelukes should not
evoke a mental picture of illiteracy and degradation. After the completion of a
primary education in religion and the rudiments of theology and Islamic law, the
young adolescent underwent training in the use of arms and tactics.*! His
protracted period of highly disciplined training in the military school formed
his character and outlook for life. Upon passing out and gaining his freedom, he
qualified for the remuneration and privileges of a full-fledged Mameluke and
might, if outstandingly able, rise to the higher amirates or even the
sultanate. From the nature of his education it follows that in the Middle East
of his epoch the bow was widely used by the literate. The fact that the contrary
was the case in the West accounts for the late appearance of Roger Ascham’s
treatise Toxophilus in 1545. There would have been little point in writing for
the illiterate, from whose ranks the average bowman was drawn.


2. ARCHERY: TECHNICAL. CONSIDERATIONS

113
The bow has played an important part in history. Not only did it prove vital to
the survival - of the human race in early times, but-it also decided only too
frequently the outcome of many great battles. Rarely do we hear of men trained
to handle powerful bows being defeated by foes who were not archers, Even when
Rome neared the height of her military power, Crassus and


INTRODUCTION xxv

114
his legions were ignomioiously slaughtered in 53 B.C. when faced with the strong
mounted bowmen of Parthia who could drive their arrows through the heavy shields
and armour of their enemies,

Since a battle could not normally be won by archers alone, hand-to-hand combat
being the decisive factor, the basic purpose of the bow was to render the enemy
incapable of effective self-defence when further attacks were finally pressed
home. In this connexion it is worth noting that the Muslim horse-archer was not
merely 2 bowman; his prowess also extended to the use of other weapons such as
the sword, the lance, and the mace. Archers of his calibre were the product of
long years of arduous training, and it cannot be too strongly emphasized that to
handle a war bow entailed great physical effort. Regular practice from boyhood
culminated in the archer’s ability as a man to handle bows requiring a pull of
60, 80, or even 100 lb. to hold them at full draw. This quantity the archer
calls the weight of the bow, Records of heavier bows exist, and rare men of
exceptional physique have been known to shoot bows weighing up to 160 lb,
Mastery of a strong bow necessarily implies that it be accurately shot, and
accuracy can never be achieved without the muscular development needed for full
control.

115As the studies of E. S. Morse (see Bibliography) have shown, man has devised
many methods of drawing the bowstring. History, however, suggests that the most
effective for use with strong bows amount to two. By one of them the first three
fingers are hooked around the string, the nock of the arrow lying between the
index and middle fingers. The longbow of the Western world was drawn in this
manner, and even today the Western archer adheres to this same method, By the
second—employed throughout most of the Orient and of immediate concern to us—
the thumb is hooked around the string and its grip reinforced by holding its tip
with the index finger. (For further details, see Ch. 10.)

The right-handed Oriental archer, who holds the bow in his left hand, must set
the arrow on the right-hand side of the bow. The moment the string is loosed,
the thumb’s pressure on the side of the string will deflect it slightly to the
right, and the foreshaft of the arrow will react by pressing against the side of
the bow as it begins to move forward. Should the arrow be placed on the left of
the bow the head will be thrown to that side, and the direction in which the
arrow will then leave the bow cannot be controlled. Since the converse is true
in the case of the Western archer shooting with the finger loose, the arrow must
be set to the left of the bow, The behaviour of the arrow when discharged is an
interesting and important subject which may be studied further elsewhere. *?

116
Pathway of string


"- 4t E ~

117
Fic, r. THUMB LOOSE



118

Protection against the chafe of the string is needed for all but the toughest
hands, In the West a glove was used, and in the East a ring or leather
thumb-stall (Ch. 6).

119The simplest form of bow is that made from a single piece of wood and tapered
from the handle towards each tip. This is the self boro, for which few woods are
suitable. In order to strengthen the bow by reducing its liability to break when
fully drawn and also, possibly, to increase its cast, or ability to project its
missile, a different kind of wood or some other substance suited to the purpose
may be glued to its back, i.e. the surface facing the target as one shoots.
When so treated, a bow is said to be backed. In the East the development of the
bow was at some remote period carried beyond this stage, probably by necessity
arising from lack of suitable wood in those areas where the development
occurred,


xxvi INTRODUCTION

120
When a bow is drawn, the belly, or inner surface, is under compression, and the
back under tension. If suitable materials can be found capable of responding
favourably to the resultant Stresses and strains, great efficiency is
attainable. In accordance with this principle the Oriental bowyer, forming a
base from a thin strip of wood, placed a layer of horn on the belly and covered
the back with ani sinew. The whole was held in place with gine and protected
from the weather by a thin covering of tree bark, lacquer, or leather. Such a
bow is termed composite, and the type is of great antiquity, for it may be seen
in its earliest representations on the stele of Naram-Sin (twenty-third century
p.c.) in the Louvre and on the Sumerian seal of Ibil-Ishtar (same period) in the
British Museum. In the composite, it should be noted, wood plays a minor part,
its main function being to provide a convenient way of joining the sinew and
horn. A wooden self bow can, of course, be reinforced with horn and sinew, but
this is not a true composite.


y

121
AT


|

122



123Fic, 2. Composrigs Bows (a). NORTE INDIAN Total length when strung: 39 inches.


INTRODUCTION xxvii

124
After some use most ordinary bows will assume a permanent curve, their tips
coming back a little towards the archer when unstrung, and this set reduces the
cast. If a bow, when made, can be so formed that it curves in the opposite
direction, this design will not only overcome the weakness in question, but it
will also increase the initial tensions in the bow and thereby add to its
efficiency. A bow so made is said to be reflexed. By using the highly flexible
materials of horn and sinew the Eastern craftsmen in most cases had their bows
so highly reflexed during manufacture that, when unstrung, their tips even
overlapped. With use, a bow of this kind would lose much of its initial shape
and settle down to a shallow C-form upon removal of the string after use. Since
such composites can withstand an enormous amount of bend, shortness of



125

2 (b). Srno-Tatar (Manchu type) Total length when strung: 66 inches.

126
Xxviii INTRODUCTION


length could be achieved in design, and this feature made them very suitable
weapons for the mounted archer,

127In a well-designed bow the weight should increase quickly during the first few
inches of the draw, after which the rate of increase should diminish as the draw
progresses. This quality was achieved in the East by the fitting of a rigid
end-piece (in Arabic, siyah, pl. siydt) to each end of the bow. When the bow was
about half-drawn, the siyaks began to act as levers so that the draw could be
continued with less increase in the weight than would have been the case without
them.  By way of example the Mongolian bow shown in Fig. 2c is very close to its
full weight at 21 in.  of draw measured from the grip to the centre of the
string. From there to the full length of 34 in. the increase is only a few
pounds. For a given weight at full draw—this quantity depending



128

2 (c). SiNO-TATAR (Mongolian type) Total length when strung: 63 inches.

129
INTRODUCTION xxix


on the archer's strength—the composite bow stores a great amount of energy which
is then available for transfer to the arrow when the string is loosed.

130When the siyahks project away from the archer before the braced bow is drawn, as
is the case with the Manchu and Mongolian bows shown in Fig. 2, a string-bridge
is fitted to prevent the string from slipping past the knee of the bow; for
should this happen the latter would violently assume its unbraced shape and
virtually turn itself inside out. This accident can happen with other composites
if the string is too long, and the result can be unpleasant both for bow and
archer


A bad arrow cannot be shot straight by even the finest bow. Its shaft must be
true, resilient, well fletched, and correctly balanced. ‘The main difference
between the arrows of East and West lies in the nock which fits on to the
bowstring. In both cases the fit must be firm enough for the arrow not to fall
from the string. The generally thicker Oriental string results in arrow nocks
that are slightly bulbous in shape and sometimes more elaborate in construction.

131Bowstrings should be light and strong. They should have no stretch once they
have settled to the bow. They may be made out of vegetable fibres, sinew, silk,
or leather, Those of vegetable fibres are usually waxed to hold the strands
together and to keep the moisture in the string.



132

^. 2 (d): INDO-PERSIAN Total length when strung: 451 inches. Length nock to
nock: 50} inches.

133



134Fic. 3. CRossBows (2). Primitive crossbow without a stirrup,


INTRODUCTION xxxi

135
Glue is sometimes used for this purpose. All silk or fibre strands are bound in
the centre to guard against chafe from the arrow nocks and the thumb. When a bow
is shot, the momentary thrust on the string as it checks the forward movement of
the bow’s limbs is in the order of five times the weight of the bow at full
draw, depending on the type and design of the bow. Such, roughly, is the
strength demanded of a bowstring. For war purposes 2 high safety margin would be
allowed, .

So far only the hand bow has been considered, which is so called to distinguish
it from the crossbow or arbalest (Fig. 3). This last was widely used in both
East and West, and the Saracens had a high reputation for their skill in
constructing them. The advantages of the crossbow over

136



137(b). Primitive crossbow with a stirrup.  (From Payne-Gallwey, Crossbow,
Figs. 24, 25.)


xxxii INTRODUCTION

138
the hand bow are that it is more accurate, requires relatively little training
to enable the user to shoot it effectively, and is usually more powerful, giving
greater penetration of armour. On the other hand, it is more expensive and
complex to produce, is slower to operate, and cumber- some to carry,

Although it can cast its missile over # great distance, it is really a
short-range weapon since it cannot be aimed at a target much beyond eighty
yards. In excess of this range the stock of the bow, the butt end of which rests
on the shoulder, must be elevated above the target, with the result that the
bowman cannot clearly see his mark. As against this, the hand bow can be aimed
up to the limit of its range. Depending on the extent of his skill, the archer
can use the technique of *underhand shooting’ whereby he views his target
beneath the bow-hand, The method was used by English longbowmen who were trained
to engage up to a distance of 240 yards, Nevertheless, to shoot at such ranges
with any accuracy needs many years of training, constant practice thereafter,
and experience to enable one to estimate range correctly and allow for the
effects of wind and weather.

139In most of the crossbows mentioned in this work the actual bow, or Zathe, which
fitted into the stock, would have been of composite construction. This was the
case in the West also prior to the introduction of steel for such purposes, The
most widely used method of retaining the string when drawn and releasing it in
shooting was provided by the nut whose operation is ill ustrated in Fig. 4.



140

Fic, 4. Crosssow Nut

141
3. MUSLIM ARCHERY LITERATURE


The main subject of our book is the technical aspect of military archery as
treated by 2 competent Mameluke authority several years before the last decade
of the Bahri period. For more than a century sporadic interest has been
shown—almost entirely by foreign scholars—in literature in the Arabic or Turkish
language relating to military training and technique. In 1929 Helmut Ritter's
review-article ‘La Parure des Cavaliers und die Literatur über die ritterlichen
Künste' in Der Islam did much to publicize the store of Islamic manuscripts
available for a study of this aspect of Muslim military history, and in recent
years there has been a'growing awareness of the need to exploit these
resources. At the same time responsible scholars have recognized

142
INTRODUCTION xxxiii


the obstacles to profitable utilization of technical literature*? and David
Ayalon, the noted | ; on the military society and army of the Mameluke
sultanate, has warned that in the

143



144A te the introduction to his Muslim Manual of War (1961) George Scanlon
discusses in some Fdetail—though not entirely without errors—the Oriental source
materials for a study of Muslim ` warfare.** The existence of this discussion,
which takes account of the contents of Ritter’s paper, ‘makes it unnecessary to
cover the same ground in these pages. Something, however, must be “said of
archery literature. In this field the first significant European publication was
T. von "Hammer-Purgstall's ‘Uber Bogen und Pfeil. Der Gebrauch und die
Verfertigung derselben bei > deri Arabern und Türken’ which appeared in the
proceedings of the Imperial Academy of Science . in Vienna in 1853.** Based on
the Turkish work of Mustafa Kini (below), Hammet’s paper, apart from the
illustrations, which are excellent, is a disappointment. A good deal of its
emphasis lies on religious and soctal aspects of archery, but from a technical
standpoint it is utterly lacking in depth. Since the author did not really
understand the subject matter of his sources, his trans- lation of technical
terms is not to be accepted without question, and we haye preferred to leave his
work aside.  _ Incomparably more important is Joachim Hein’s *Bogenhandwerk und
Bogensport bei den

Osmanen’ which appeared in three parts in Der Islam, XIV-XV (1925-6) and ran
into more than

145200 pages. The work is essentially an analysis and discussion of the Turkish
treatise Telhis resail er-rümát*" (Summary of the Treatise of Archers) writen by
one Mustafa Kani at the command of the Ottoman sultan, Mahmüd II (1809-39),
himself a skilled bowman, While Hein rendered a valuable service by revealing to
Western readers the essential contents of what is probably the most valuable
treatise on Ottoman flight shooting, his knowledge of the technical aspects of
archery was, as can be detected by the experienced eye, second-hand and far from
profound, Fortunately, the German scholar’s researches attracted the attention
of Paul E.  Klopsteg, an American physicist, who combined expert technical
knowledge with a sufficiently keen interest in the subject to prepare a study of
those parts of Hein’s work on the Telts which he felt to be of interest to
archers, Privately published in 1934 under the title Turkish Archery and the
Composite Bow, Klopsteg's book was so successful that in 1947 he produced a
revised edition which, like the first, soon went out of print. Its contents
accurately reflect the essential interest of the Telfis, which lies neither in
target shooting nor the war bow, but in the Ottoman © sport of flight shooting
(Ch. 19). The author's treatment of the subject, which ranges from the making of
the bow to the organization of the archers’ guild, is detailed and
authoritative, and his thorough exposition of the manner in which the flight bow
is built is of unique and inestimable value for our understanding of the nature
of composite construction. It should, however, be noted that in dealing with
matters outside the sphere of his specialty Mustafa Kani relied on older sources
which, as our own research has taught us, he did not always understand as well
as . he ought. Thus, in borrowing from his medieval predecessors—Taybugha
amongst them—he often failed to discern textual corruption in the manuscripts on
which he drew. Since Hein, it is obvious, did not appreciate this fact, it
follows that apart from making mistakes of his own he transmitted those of
Mustafa Kani.

Once awakened, through the efforts of Klopsteg, to the existence of a new
dimension to their subject, Western archers with historical interests began to
ponder the wealth of information that might lie concealed in Muslim technical
literature of the Middle East. In 1945 their curiosity was partially satisfied
and at the same time intensified by the appearance of a translation of an
anonymous Arabic manuscript written in the Muslim West about a.D. 1500. This was
Arab Archery, the outcome of close collaboration between an Arabist and an
archer, respectively Nabih Amin Faris and Robert P. Elmer. Much that was new to
the toxophilite emerged from

146
xxxiv INTRODUCTION


Arab Archery, and its unquestionable worth as a source of technical information
was enhanced by the inclusion of useful appendices, At the same time it would be
unrealistic to deny that from the standpoint of translation and annotation it
leaves room for some improvement. In particular, unfamiliarity with the field of
Arabic archery literature and an evident lack of patience to explore it have
resulted in inaccuracies which might have been avoided even by some reference to
Hein.** Only too frequently notes are lacking where they are most needed, though
it must be said in all fairness that this criticism does not apply so much where
important technical points are con- cerned. Apart from the fact that there.is no
historical introduction to orient the layman, there are too few diagrams, no
bibliography, and an inadequate index. Nevertheless, we owe a great debt of
gratitude to Faris and Elmer, as indeed to Hein and Klopsteg, for their most
valuable role in affording a stimulus to our own research.

147In 1956 a substantial paper entitled ‘Mamelucko-turecka wersja arabskiego
traktatu o lucznictwie z XIV w.’ was published by A. Zajączkowski in the Polish
periodical Rocsnik orient- alistyczny (vol. XX, pp. 139-261). Its contents,
which are clearly relevant to our subject, include a Mameluke Turkish text in
fascimile, introduction, and glossary, Unfortunately, linguistic factors prevent
us from evaluating its importance. .

A work which is not primarily a study of bows or archery, but which is, to some
limited degree, concerned with terminology relating to Islamic bows is Kalervo
Huuri’s Geschichte des mittelalterlichen Geschiitzwesens (pp. 94 fE). Although
of interest, it has not proved af great value in elucidating the more important
problems with which Taybughà's work has confronted us.

148Some impression of the range of unpublished material in the Arabic language may
best be derived both from the detailed survey with which Hein prefaced his study
of the Telhis (Isi., XIV, pp. 299-307) and from Scanlon’s introduction to his
Manual (pp. 11-14). Here no more than three works need be mentioned, and that
only because we shall need to cite them for the purposes of comparison or
elucidation. The first and by far the oldest, in that it dates from about the
last quarter of the twelfth century, is a general treatise on arms, armour, and
weapons of wat, viz. Tabsirat arbab al-albab ft kayfiyyat an-najat ft -hurab
(“Enlightenment for the Intelligent on the Means of Deliverance in Warfare") by
Mardi ibn ‘Ali t-Tarsiisi. Partially edited and translated by Claude Cahen with
the convenient label ‘Un traité d'armurerie composé pour Saladin’ (BEO, XII,
1947-8), the Tabsirah contains an important section on archery which Cahen did
not include in his extracts, but which has now been prepared for publication by
Antoine Boudot-Lamotte of the University of Bordeaux." The second, dating from
the thirteenth century, is an independent treatise on archery of which the first
part of the title is Kitab al-wagik ("The Clear Book").*? Written by a certain
at-Tabari (on whom, see p. 49), the Wagik was one of the principal sources
utilized by the author of Arab Archery and is a major work, offering, among
other things, a detailed description of tlie teachings of the Great Masters as
they were known to at-Tabari. The third work, by a Muhammad al-Aqsara i
(d. 1348), is Nihàyat as-su'l , . . fi... a'màl al-furüsiyyah, whose verbose
title indicates that it is a manual of instruction on the art of war and
military skills and techniques. The first section of this manual, of which a
critical edition was prepared (but not published) by A. L. S. M. Lutful- Hug in
1956,*! is devoted to archery. It is comparatively short and, while by no means
as impor- tant as the Wadih, it nevertheless contains information which we have
found useful. Since its teaching belongs to a somewhat different tradition from
that considered in our work, care must be tuken not to try and equate it with
that of Taybughá. |

To enter into a discussion of Persian and Turkish archery literature is beyond
our present purpose. It should not on that account be thought that little or
none exists or that it is of no value.  On the contrary, it does exist and, far
from being unimportant, we have reason to believe that its investigation is
vital to the solution of many problems raised in the more important Arabic
treatises. This is particularly true in the case of etymological problems and
matters of technical terminology.

149
INTRODUCTION XXXv


4. THE PRESENT WORK

150
i The British Museum Manuscript

This book is based on the contents of an Arabic manuscript preserved in the
British Museum with the shelfmark Add. 23489. Although it is undated, all
circumstantial evidence suggests that it is not later than the fifteenth
century, and itis possible that it goes back to the end of the fourteenth,
Attributable to a certain ‘Taybughi l-Ashrafi |-Bakiamishi 1-Yiinini, it is
entitled

151T ghunyat af-fullab fi ma'rifat ramy an-nushshäb, or in free translation
“Essential Archery for Beginners’. The text has neither been published nor
studied hitherto.


Description. The manuscript, which is enclosed in a red leather binding that is
neither the original nor Oriental, consists of 139 folios measuring 27 X 18
cm. For the most part there are ten lines to the page written in legible
Mameluke naskhi to give a text of approximately 21 x 14 cm. Although vocalized
it presents a high proportion of inaccurate vowels. Originally cream- coloured,
the paper is mostly stained to 9 brownish-grey by dampness which in certain
folios has obliterated parts of the text, though illegible words can often be
easily restored by reversing the impression they have left on the opposite
page. There is some damage to the first folio, and to- wards the end small
perforations in the paper begin to appear, until finally we are left with a
sizeable hole in folio 138 from which anything that might have been of value in
the colophon is irretrievably lost. A marginal note confirms that the manuscript
is not an autograph, but a transcript. The verso of this same folio bears the
names of two people. The more important is that of a certain Alfi Qani Bak
ssh-Sharifi. Written in a large, imposing Mameluke hand, the name

152to be the signature of an official, and from the use of the title Alft we know
that its writer held the rank of Commander of a Thousand, the highest amirate in
the Mameluke army.™ Although the signature is i neither by date nor other useful
information, we may note, firstly, that just such a rank was held by the Grand
Master of the Armour (amir sila) whose duties included supervision of the
arsenal,"* and, secondly, that in connexion with events of A.H. 902 (1496-7) Ibn
Iyis mentions a personage whose name and rank are identical with those indicated
by our signature. The name recurs elsewhere as that of a member of the sultan’s
entourage in 1514 who stood out in Ibn Iyās’ memory and whom he describes,
amongst other things, as having charge of the arsenal Above this signature is
the name of one "Abd al-Latif ibn ‘Abd al-Qadir, who declares that after some
searching he finally acquired the work he had been looking for, viz. Taybughá's
Gkunyah. The date appearing with this information is A.H. 1085 (1674-5). |

From the title-page we learn nothing about the author. Below the title an
ornamental medallion in blue, red, and gold encloses the ex-libris of a Mameluke
Superintendent of the Arsenal (shddd as-silahkhangh) named as the amir Sayf
ad-Din Jānim (not Hātim as in the B.M. catalogue) al-Malaki l-Ashrafi. These
last two words indicate that the officer in question was the servant of the
sultan who bore the title al-Malik al-Ashraf (‘Most Noble Ruler’). There is a
temptation, for reasons which we shall soon see, to think only of Sha'bün, but
it must be remembered that Barsbay (1422-38) and Indl (1453-61) were also so
styled. Furthermore, the only amirs we have been able to trace with names
similar to that of the original owner of our manuscript are two for whom there
are biographical entries in Ibn Taghribirdi’s al-Manhal as-Saft.** Both bear the
name Sayf ad-Din Janim al-Ashrafi. The first, a relative of Barsbay, who is
described as having been a Commander of TablkhánáhY! and, in A.H. 836 (1432-3)
Commander of a Thousand, died at some unspecified date after A.H. 852 (1448-9),
in which year he was stationed in Jerusalem. The second, described as Bearer and
Keeper of the Inkwell (damadar) and surnamed Chief of the

153
xxxvi INTRODUCTION


Corps (Le. of Mamelukes; ra's nawbah)** from the time he had held that office,
died about A.H. 850 (1446). Whether one of these amirs is the person whom we are
seeking to identify, we cannot say. Certaihly, there is nothing in their cursus
honorum to connect them with the office which concerns us, but it is, of course,
conceivable that such information as we have about them is either incomplete or
not entirely accurate.**

154DM CIE BEC i ca RA These we can ignore. (See Plate r.) |


Contents, Briefly, the Ghunyah contains: (a) an introduction; (b) a didactic
poem on archery in 149 verses cast in the metre rajaz; (c) a technical
commentary on the latter; (d) additional sections and material not strictly
related to the commentary, but relevant in the main to the subject of the work
as 2 whole.

155The introduction consists of a religious perspective of archery within the
Islamic scheme of things ‘and, more importantly from our standpoint, a brief,
though irritatingly inadequate.  indication of the nature, purpose, and
background of the book. Here the author tells us that he composed a concise
didactic poem on archery and that when ee x amie comprehensive basic work and a
full, perfect, and useful authority' (p. 4), he with a commentary and introduced
new material. Although the Arabic does not ntake it orci diee he seems to imply
that neither his commentary nor the supplementary portions to which

he specifically refers were undertaken immediately upon conclusion of the poem,
but at some later stage. If this interpretation is correct, any date assigned to
the poem (below) should not be regarded as necessarily applicable to the
Ginatyah, but only as a terminus post quem.

156From the verses of the poem we learn two things: ia Ca diat it war cotidiod
Chapa d ace toa-gháyat al-marámi li-I-mu'ànt (roughly, ‘Essential Archery for
the Fighting Archer, Or All That the Toiler Desires");*! (b) that the author's
name was as stated in the first paragraph of this sec tion. Beyond the little
that can be inferred from the name itself, viz. that he was by origina Turkist
slave imported from Greece and manumitted on conversion to Islam we know nothing
for certair about Taybughà. The biographer Ibn Hajar, however, in his dictionary
of notabilities deceased in the fourteenth century (eighth century A.H.) makes
the laconic entry under the year A.H. 79; (1394-5): “Taybugha ibn ‘Abd Allah, a
certain celebrated warrior, died in prison in Aleppo.'* That the subject of the
entry is none other than our author is more likely thannot. The patronymi ‘ibn
“Abd Allah’ was regularly adopted by converts to Islam after recruitment into
Mameluk: service and is, therefore, not inconsistent with other information
concerning his name. Secondly all internal evidence in the Ghunyah points to an
author domiciled in Syria. Thirdly, th Ghunyah is definitely not the work of a
theorist, but of a practising expert whose name, if we ar to judge by the aumber
of extant manuscripts.of his book (below), would have been well enougl ~ ma ame
ica ine USING I JN Hajar’ “Who’s Who’


Oder Mania

157
Add, 23489 is only one of a number of manuscripts which either purport to be
Taybugha’ work or are, with or without acknowledgement, modified or expanded
versions of it. In some case the title is lacking or differs to a greater or
lesser degree from that already indicated. Out of possible total of seventeen
manuscripts originally traced by us in reference works, fifteen sub sequently
became available for inspection, one in photostat, and the rest in
microfilm. Carefu collation resulted in a decision to divide them into seven
distinct groups which it prove convenient to denote by the symbols, A, a, B, b,
b, C, D (below, and pp. 195-96).

Without pausing at this stage to specify the source of each of our manuscripts
and thei

158
e ee 1 ew


INTRODUCTION xxxvii

159
respective places in our scheme of classification in as briefly as possible our
predilection for Add. 24389 (hereafter An, vds. qas sia uius som recla, not an
auto- graph. It is in fact an undated Copy transcribed from some other
manuscript of which we know nothing, and, since it is probably assignable to the
fifteenth century and therefore later than either of the B manuscripts, date is
not the criterion, Nor is the accuracy of the copylst s transcription, for
scribal errors, though not abundant, are yet not infrequent. Paradoxically, it
is primarily the poor and, at times, truly execrable quality of the author’s
Arabic that disposes us to believe in the value of the text supplied by At,
Taybughá, the imported ex-slave was not & native Arabic speaker and, in spite of
his education in the literary language, ixhaned as a writer under the handicap
of what he himself in his introduction terms his ‘barbarous Arabic" (‘ujmat
al-lisdn). In no manuscript (apart from the defective A? which has been copied
from the same source) is there greater evidence of the latter, It is not merely
a question of the usual grammatical errors-


_ guilty. It is, rather, a matter of linguistic inadequacy, which at times
causes the author to express

160
cite numerous examples; some of the more im n our notes.

The text of a, an Istanbul manuscript dling Seen the very be ed up ee fifteenth
century, is a modified version of that represented by the preceding. Although it
tends to drop difficult passages and misinterpret others, it docs supply certain
lacunae glossed over in manuscripts of other groups. It also adds some snippets
of useful information.

161In manuscripts of the B group we find a text characterized not only by a
markedly higher standard of Arabic than that found in A, but also by fewer
errors of scansion in the poem. The language is more idiomatic, there are fewer
colloquialisms, and a higher literary standard is attained. To take but one
example; it requires no great depth of knowledge of acumen to perceive bow over
a fire’, B*, 75a) is a more acceptable mode of expression than the
semi-colloquial kayfa yu’ pl n-ndr hi-l-gaws (A!, 61a). Another interesting
characteristic of the B group version is the disappearance or the emergence in
modified form of material or to which the more sensitive elements of orthodox
Islamic society might rightly or wrongly take exception. Thus the archer is not
advised, as in A, to show his fellow-archers ‘the affection that a dog has for
its master’ (p. 157), nor is the formal plea for God's mercy (tarkim) extended
to include a horse that his parents’ consent, but only that of his father (p,
157), and so on.

That the text of the B group of manuscripts is a revised and slightly enlarged
version of A By whom it was produced, on the other hand, we cannot say but we
feel safe in supposing that it was neither the author nor anyone who had the
benefit of his co-operation since certain errors, principally of a technical
nature, can only be satisfactorily explained &$ misinterpretations of what was
written by the inarticulate originator of A, whom, in the of evidence to the
contrary, we take to be Taybugha. Because of its carly date and superior Arabic
which, in spite of some demonstrable errors, for the most part correctly and
lucidly interprets 'l'aybughá's meaning, the B group version has much to commend
it

162As regards b, a Leiden manuscript of indeterminate date, it is to the B group
more or less what a is to the A group. There are marked charges į :c words tend
to replace © terms of Persian and Turkish origin. ENORMES

The C manuscripts, the earliest of which ig inning of the fifteenth century,
present a text that has been revised and expanded far band the supe of the
original.  Not only is the poem, with close on 250 veryes, Noticeably much
longer than anything in the A

163
xxxviii | INTRODUCTION


and B groups, but there is also an increase in prose content. The interpolation
of material of coubtful validity for the time and place with which we are
concerned makes this C version a trap for the unwary, and those not qualified to
exploit it judiciously would do well to avoid it. If handled with caution,
however, it can be turned to advantage where certain problems are almost
insoluble on the basis of A and B texts, or used to furnish supplementary data
where necessary or desirable. For the first time we are offe oh ga UE OG aterm
GE (1368-9). Although we have no means of confirming it, we accept it on grounds
that it in no way conflicts with any known evidence. On the con >it falls within
the reign of the Mameluke sultan al-Malik al-Ashraf Sha'băn, for whom the work
would seem, from dedicatory verses in B*, b*-¥, b, to have been originally
written,

164The two undated manuscripts of the D group offer a text that differs in some
important respects from that of C. It is probably directly descended from the
latter and, needless to say, should be used according to the same principles and
subject to the same caution,

Of all manuscripts known to us, there are anly two which, for reasons beyond our
control, we bave not consulted, viz. the Cairo and Gotha items mentioned in
Brockelmann, II, p. 169, the first of which, we are told, can no Jonger be
traced. In the absence of the original manuscript of the Ghunyah it seems very
doubtful whether any other would have much to contribute to what we already
know, least of all at the technical level.

165
Because of the form in which Taybughà chose to impart his teaching a
straightforward translation of his Ghunyah as it stands would make impossible
reading. The poem as such would mean little without the commen ; and that part
of the commentary in which the author follows the usual method of taking one or
more verses word by word in order to explain the bare meaning before enlarging
on the theme would bewilder and bore the reader with what, to us, are
translator's


woven into the adjacent fabric. Pious invocations, religious formulae, and
sententiae in rhymed Prose, so dear to the Muslim writer, have, except in
special cases and for special reasons, been expunged as superfluities un ial to
modern Western taste.

166Having pruned the text in this way and in one or two cases—indicated in the the
position of subject sections to give a more natural sequence of chapters, we
have left the hard core virtually intact and translated as faithfully as
possible. When a literal rendering has proved impracticable, we have not
hesitated merely to give the sense, or, if the Arabic does not fall quite
naturally into an English mould, to expand a word or phrase to meet
requirements.  The Arabist, furthermore, will see that our language is often
more technical than the Arabic.  Where it is so, we have usually been guided by
the need for clarity and brevity, and we have done our best to avoid ‘blinding
with science’ by seeking out compromises, To illustrate, we feel obliged to
translate ‘the crease at the base of the finger between the first section of the
finger and the palm of the hand? as ‘the proximal crease’, though we do spare
the layman the more anatomically correct ‘metacarpo-phalangeal crease’. -

The more important expansions of the text are enclosed in half-brackets, 1, and
in no case where the text may admit of an alternative interpretation are these
lacking. They have, of course, been regarded as indispensable where an addition
has been made from another manuscript.  Short explanations not worth referring
to the notes are enclosed in parentheses as also Arabic or other foreign terms,
etc. Finally, notes of special interest to the archer are indicated by
asterisked references. |

167
INTRODUCTION xxxix


One small but important point must be made. For the impersonal idea Taybughà
uses the second and third persons singular indiscriminately. When he passes from
one to the other in a single sentence in which the one is in syntactical
relationship with the other, we have brought the verbs into conformity with
correct English usage. In all other cases the matter bas been decided largely on
its merits, for without re-writing the whole text we cannot easily rectify the
author's slipshod habits.

168As regards chapter-headings, many, but by no means all, are indicated in the
Arabic text.  Where they are lacking they have been supplied, and in Ch. 25 we
have brought together under one comprehensive title several small sections, each
with its own heading which is retained in sub-title form.

On folio 109b of our manuscript there begins a lengthy exposition of the rules
and regulations of archery as a competitive sport. Much of this bears on the
permissibility and implications of competitions in Islamic legal theory, and
since it can have little or no general appeal, we have excluded it from the
present work. All other material in the manuscript which is irrelevant to
archery (folios 129a—136b) is also omitted,

169
iv The importance of the Ghunyah

Written at a time when the bow, as opposed to firearms, was still a primary
weapon, the Ghunyah is a work of major importance in the history of arms and
armour. Its indisputably practical author, who is clearly a master of his
subject, makes a unique contribution to our knowledge of the Muslim
horse-archer’s techniques, of which, for the first time, we have a detailed
explanation. Next in importance are the specifications which he gives of the
best war bow of his day and area, expressed in convertible measurements whose
value we have proved.  Thirdly, he communicates information enabling us to
assess the degree of accuracy expected of the average archer without clouding
the issue with stories of fantastic shots. Similarly, he furnishes data giving
us a clear idea of the minimum discharge velocities of adequate war bows. The
work also contains much new and valuable information on a variety of subjects,
notably on atrow-guides and other devices, Not least among its merits is that it
constitutes a standard of comparison by which the value of Arab Archery—which it
often clarifies and not infrequently contradicts—can be more accurately
gauged. Finally, it includes two excellent chapters on rules of practice and
professional ethics which, mutatis mutandis, are as valid today as when they
were formulated, :

170Taybughi did, of course, draw to some extent on the work of other authors,
notably in certain sections which he evidently added as afterthoughts. There is
every indication that he was acquainted, though more probably indirectly than
directly, with the contents of the Tabsirah and the Wadih as well as other
sources which we leave it to others to trace and investigate.  What should be
realized, however, is that whatever he transmits from others, he almost
invariably transmits with the discrimination and understanding of one who knows
his subject. In this.  respect he contrasts sharply with some whose technical
writings we have examined and only too often found to be uncritical and
confusing compilations masked by an impressive exterior,


xl NOTES TO INTRODUCTION

171
f. We generalize, The Caliphs were at Samarra almost continually from 836 to
892, Moreover, not all the Caliphs were puppets from 945 to 1258, since after
the fall of the Seljugs a few of them, notably an-Nügir, did exercise some
limited authority in Iraq.

2. EP, s.v. ‘Abbasids (B. Lewis). i

1723. Mandgib, pp. 11-12. Cf. English translation in JRAS (C. T. H. Walker), 1915,
p. 646, which should, however, be used with caution.

4. Ibid., p. 28 (RAS, 1915, p. 666),

1735. Ibid., p. 29. A discussion of Turkish tactics may be found in Smail,
Crusading Werfare, pp. 75-83.


9. El, s.v. Ayyübids (C. Cahen), ;

174IO. EP, s.v. Babriyya (D. Ayalon). Cf. Ayalon, FAOS, 69, p. 136. In Mameluke
sources this first period is commonly called “The Turks! State’.

I1. EÑN, s.v.

175I2. Scripta, pp. 37 ff.

I3. We are less well informed about Syria in the Mameluke period than about
Egypt, and it would be wrong to assume that the situation was exactly the same
in both countries, From all that we have read, we suspect that erchery declined
much more slowly in the former than in the latter, and the Syrian background,
against which the Ghunyah is written, suggests as much, It is worth noting that
in the fourteenth century Syrian archera were valued as far west as Morocco and
that in Fez they inhabited a quarter named after Hims (the ancient Emesa) in

176« Syria, (Sce R. Le Tourneau, Fes avant le Protectorat, Paria, 1949, p. 66.)
Archaeological evidence leaves no doubt that the Sasanid design of composite bow
was known in Syria as early as the first half of the eighth century. It may well
be, then, that the area enjoyed a tradition in archery dating from the late
Umayyad period.

I4. On the various meanings of bundug, eee Glossary.

177IS. Scripta, p. 56, t. 142.

16. Came to an end 1517. On the Circassians, who came from the Caucasus, see El,
s.v. Çerkes (Ayalon).

178t7. Ayalon, FAOS, 69, p. 145.

18. Gunpowder, p. 61, Cf. EI*, s.v. Bartid, sect. iii (Ayalon).

17919. EI$, s.v. Malka (Ayalon) and Awld an-Nis (idem).

26. To belong to the Mameluke corps, it was necessary to have been born outside
the Mameluke state and to have been imported as e young slave.

18021. Demiled information on the education and training of a young Mameluke may be
derived from D. Ayaion's L'esclavage du mamelouk, Jerusalem, 1951. Although less
well trained than the Royal Mamelukes (those of the sultan), the amirs'
Mamelukes seen to have attended military schools of their masters (Ayalon,
BSOAS, XV, p Mos It should be noted that these schools were not officers’
schools. AH Mamelukes passed out as private soldiers,

22. Sec P. E. Klopsteg, Archery: the Technical Side, pp. 122-46 and 178-89, and
R. P. Elmer, Target Archery,

181
Pp. 440767.

23. Sce in particular Scanlon's observations on Huuri's study of medieval
ertillery according to oriental sources and Ayalon’s Gunpowder (Manual,
pp. 20-21),

18224. Scripta, p. 31.

25. Pp. I-21. 1

18326. Denkschr. d. kais. Akad. der, Wiss. Wien, Phil. Hist. KI. IV, 1853.

27. For convenience, Hein's transliteration of the title is retained.

18428. Jsl., XIV, pp. 299 ff. :

29. Since these lines were written this part of the Tabsirak has appeared (text,
translation, glossary, and notes) in A. Boudot-Lamotte, Contribution à l'étude
de l'archerie musulmane (Damascus, 1968).

18536. The second part of the title is uncertain. Different versions occur.

31. For details, see Latham and Paterson, JSS, 10, p. 253. Cf. Scanlon, Manual,
pp. 9-11.

18632. On which, see Ayalon, BSOAS, XV, P- 467.

33. Ayalon, BSOAS, XVI, p. 60.

18734. Wiet, Mamlouks circassiens, IL, p. 406.

35. Idem, Journal, I, p. 384. :

18836. Wiet, Biographies, nos. $03, 805,

37. "Tbe Amir of Tablkhóna was so called because holders of this and higher
ranks were entitled to have a band playing (sabikhdna) in front of their
houses.’ (Ayalon, BSOAS, XV, p. 469.)

18938. On which see Ayalon, BSOAS, XVI, pp. 60-61.

39. Ibn Fyas also mentions an amir Jánim al-Ashrafi whom he describes in
speaking of his daughter in A.H. 927 (1520-1) as the old governor of the
province of Damascus, (Wiet, Journal, IT, p. 385.)

19040. Vv. 27, 146.

4I. The word al-murdmi is translatable as ‘the competitive archer’, but the
sense which we give is preferable.

19142. Inb al-ghumr (Bodleian-Library MS Huntington, 123, fo. 129a). Cf. Ritter,
Jsl., XVIII, p. 137.

43. C}, r7b; C*, 343; C?, 122. -

19244. B*, rza; bł, rgb; b?, 6a; b, sa.


THE DOXOLOGY

193
In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.  My Lord, ease my task for
me, O Thou who art-bountiful.!


Praise be to God, whose judgement is just, whose knowledge is complete, whose
dominion is almighty, whose proof shines forth with overwhelming light;

194Who protects and safeguards His friends, who plucks out and shatters His foes; i

Who grants victory and succour to the Faith (i.e. Islam), who subdues and
scatters Unbelief;

195Who unleashes His might and affliction ‘against those who reject His authority,
who brings in’?  all His servants beneath His sovereign power!

Without recourse to any, He does what He wishes; whatever He wills comes to pass
without hindrance; whatever He decrees is executed unchallenged.

196It is He who has made men in their several kinds: the guided, the straying, the
happy, the wretched, the clever, the stupid.

It is He who pays each group of humankind its due, be it vengeance or
punishment, favour or rewards, neither diverting men from that which they earn
for themselves nor turning them away from that which they deserve.

197To Him be praise for that He has rendered the company of His supporters
victorious and subdued His enemies—praise with which the banners of Islam will
rise supreme and mastery will, in the course of time and with the passing of the
days, be gained over all places and all mankind !?

The blessing and peace of God be upon our lord Muhammad, the Chosen, Bearer of
the Un- chailengeably Truthful Message and Incisively Manifest Discourse,‘ Head
of the Pious House’ and Unsullied Line, whom God sent as Prophet and Messenger
that he might be a pathway to His knowledge and a pilot to the paths of His
guidance, so that at the last he caused Truth to prevail and be followed, and
falsehood to be vanquished and repulsed—a blessing to include his godly Family
and his excellent Companions!

198
CHAPTER 1 THE AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION


Most of the introduction is devoted to an exposition of the religious basis on
which the practice of

199archery is held to rest. Since the subject matter, containing a good deal of
pious fiction, is of limited

interest it is best summarized as follotos : Archery is a religious obligation
established in the Koran on the basis of Muhammad’s own explanation of sura
viii. 62, where the word guwwah (‘force’) is taken to refer to archery.  The
Prophet himself, furthermore, was an archer and possessed three bows. The terms
in which he urged his community to practise riding and archery—preferably the
latter—amount to a standing order, and archery is a fard kifayah (i.e. a
religious obligation incumbent, not upon each individual, but upon the community
by representation). When his Companions engaged in archery contests, the Prophet
used to attend and would support one or other of the contending parties (3a-4b).

200Certain authors relate that Adam, after being sent down from paradise, was
commanded to raise crops. Two birds ate what he sowed, and so he complained to
God, who sent Gabriel with a bow, a string, and two arrows. Being asked what
these things were, Gabriel explained, as he handed them over, that the bow was
the force (quwwah) of God, the string was the might (shiddah) of God, and the
arrows the harm to be inflicted (nikdyah) by God. He then taught Adam to shoot,
whereupon he killed the birds. Knowledge of archery then passed to Abraham,
Ishmael and Isaac, and archery is indeed the legacy of these illustrious
ancestors (4b—5b).

There is an authentic tradition of the Prophet that it is a sin to give up
archery after learning the art. There are, furthermore, numerous traditions of
the Prophet which commend archery.  He himself used to preach, leaning on a bow,
and considered that there was no better weapon.  Gabriel had an Arab bow on the
day of the battle of Uhud (fought between Muhammad and the tribe of Quraysh to
the north of Medina, March, A.D. 625). The excellence of the bow is ‘the subject
of many traditions of the Prophet, which are too numerous for inclusion in the
present work (sb-9b).

201
The author now continues:

Since archery and riding are enjoined by authentic command of the Prophet
himself and as I knew of no treatise by any previous author. on the subject of
shooting from horseback, I felt I should like to accord the excellent
accomplishments of archery and riding joint treatment in a single work. My aim
is so doing would be to comply with the command of God and His Messen- ger
(Muhammad) and to assist those of my Muslim brethren who campaign and fight in
the Holy War. "This I could do! by virtue of such knowledge of the subject as
Almighty God had imparted to me over a long period of painstaking care and
endeavour and after acquiring familiarity with most of the information on record
regarding the primary and secondary bases.of archery as expounded in time past
by men of repute and distinction who ranked among the | authorities of their day
and who lived in, and hailed from, ali countries. I therefore wrote the

202
3


4 SARACEN ARCHERY

203
exposition of theory and practice of the art to both infantry and cavalry. When
my poem was finished and proved to be a comprehensive basic work on this art and
a full, perfect, and useful


finishing touches to the content of the poem and to elucidate difficult
points. By so doing, it has been my intention to explain modes of expression and
throw light on allusions, so that the rarities of its contents might be brought
within the grasp of him who would seck them out. May God, therefore, have mercy
upon any man who views my work with approval and makes good any imperfections
which it may contain!?, , . In order to carry out my task I went into seclusion
and, far from my homeland and handicapped by an inability to express myself well
because of my barbarous Arabic, produced my poem.t

204
T For reasons explained in the Introduction (p. xxxvii) we do not translate the
poem which immediately follows in the Arabic text (10b-19a).


CHAPTER 2 THE PILLARS OF ARCHERY

205
_ Successful shooting hinges on accuracy, the infliction. of injury, the ability
to strike from a distance, the ability to strike swiftly, and the ability to
protect one's own body.)

These five points! are the pillars (arkdn) on which archery rests, and the true
archer is he whose mastery of them is complete, They are interdependent in the
same way as five entities vital to archery are interdependent, namely, the bow,
the string, the arrow, the thumb-guard and the archer, "That such is the case is
clear from the reasoning which follows.’ Should a man’s arrow be true to the
mark but be harmless, it would be ineffective. Conversely, should his arrow be
capable of inflicting injury but not true to the mark, it would be of no
avail. Should the arrow be both true to the mark and also capable of inflicting
injury but the archer fail to protect himself adequately against his foe, the
latter may kill him. Again, should accuracy, the ability to injure, and the
skill to afford oneself adequate protection all be present at the same time, but
speed be lacking, the archer’s adversary will very likely take flight and his
quarry elude him because of slowness in shooting. Finally, should all the four
conditions which we have mentioned be satisfied without the archer’s keeping
well away from the foe, his antagonist will possibly take him unawares and slay
him. It is in fact only because archery can be used at a distance from the enemy
that it has come to be regarded as superior to all other means of warfare. For
the longer the range from which the archer can shoot, the greater the harm he
can do his enemy ‘with correspondingly less risk to his own safety’,

206
COMMENT


‘Comparable subject matter is to be found in Arab Archery, pp. 18-19, where
shooting is said to rest on four pillars, viz. speed, strength (of one’s
arrows), accuracy and care in self-defence, The second of these is similar to
the second point in our list, for the argument is that unless one's arrows are
strong and penetrating, the enemy will ward them off with his shield. To the _
four pillars there correspond four entities. With the exception of the
thumb-guard, of which there is No mention, they are identical with those given
above.

207
CHAPTER 3 ON BOWS


Although there are many kinds of bow, there are basically only two: the hand bow
(gaws yad) and the crossbow (qaws rifi), There are many kinds of hand bow. There
is the old "Beduin? Arab bow, which they used to

208
make of nab‘ (Grewia poplifolia) and also of shawhat, which is the same as
murrán (Cornus mas).  This bow was made either of one stave or two jointed
together’, The ancient Arab poet says:


I shoot with this which is all one branch and is three cubits and a finger.*

209
The settled Arabs, on the other hand, applied sinew to the backs of their bows
(yu'agqibina zuhüraha) and often lined the bellies with goat horn. Peculiar to
the noble Hejaz, these kinds of bow have neither siyaks nor "shaped! handles
(smagdbid).

There is also the intermediate bow (másitiyyah), which is made of horn, wood,
sinew, and glue.  It was so called because it occupies an intermediate position
between the Hejazi bow and tbe Persian bow. The Arabs also call it munfasilah
(‘that comprising separate elements ‘fitted ——

210The Khorasanians adhere to the principle that ‘the length of? the lower siyah
should be one-

sixth of the laminated portion of the bow,** the upper siyah being longer by as
much as the

211measurement of the little finger when turned down in finger-reckoning {on which,
see Appendix 4

below, p. 167). The working part of the upper limb would, in this case, be as
long as the archer’ forearm, and the Jower as long as his upper arm.

212The Turks, Persians, and Iraqis are for their part agreed on the principle that
the longer the siyahs and the shorter the limbs and the more rigid and slender
the handle, the better the cast (aprad k-s-sahm). Better cast is in particular
achieved by the slender bow (i.e. the flight bow; below, Ch. 19), in which, by
their rule, the limbs must fall back (? mustalgt; see Glossary) and the grip be
short.

` The best and most useful hand bows are those composed of wood, sinew, horn,
and glue (i.e.  the composite bow proper; below, p. 11). Its composite character
displays profound wisdom and august and sublime workmanship, for it is produced
after the formation of a human being and is of comparable structure. For even as
man is built on four foundations, namely, bone, flesh, arteries, and blood, so
is the ‘composite’ bow formed in like manner inasmuch as the wood corresponds to
bone in man, the horn to flesh, the sinews, which are intricately disposed
through- out its members, to the arteries, which are intricately disposed
throughout man's members, and the glue to the blood by which the whole is held
together. Like man, bows are provided with a back and a belly and can bend
bellywise like man. When they are bent backwards, they will snap, as would be
the case with man.* -

213Authorities on archery agrec that in our time the best bows of this type are
those manufactured


6

214
ON BOWS 7


in Syria, the finest of them being the excellent weapon known as the ‘superb’
(fahlah), which is the handiwork of the most highly esteemed masters (ustddi) of
the bowyer’s art. This is because

215
further and launch more effective shafts (ankd sihdm**) than any other kind of
hand bow.  These are facts which could be denied by no one but a person
unacquainted with a bow of this type or someone who had failed to get a really
good specimen. if he has one, the archer should look after it well and keep it
under constant supervisi

The proficient artisan is a man of experience with a mastery of the essentials
of bis craft.  Moreover, in all things capability is the essential. This is
particularly true of the bowyer's art,

216
A Nock (Fard)



217



218


ope pee j So ae f, Neck (Ung) Dividing Edge | — (Kanai) String(Watr) Arrow UA, G
i i Od ) a idi a e — ——- || Packing Piece (ibranjak)

219
8 SARACEN ARCHERY


for the fashioning of a bow calls for more competence than anything else if a
truly good weapon is to be obtained. Its manufacture also calls for more
patience, since it cannot be properly completed in less than a full year. Autumn
must be devoted to the carving and preparation of the wooden core (al-khashab),
on the one hand, and to the sawing and fitting of the horn (al-Eham;

220see Glossary), on the other. Winter is the season for binding and reflexing
(al-hazm wa-r-raf*),* and then at the beginning of spring the sinew is applied
(tarkib al-'agab). Next, in summer, the bow, as yet unfinished (Kham), is strung
and rounded to the curvature required (layyuha halgat**). It is then veneered
with bark and painted (at-tatoiz wa-d-dihan).

According to the consensus of masters with experience of the weapon, be they
craftsmen or archers, the mean length of a bow of this type, taken from nock to
nock, should amount in ail to one cubit and two-thirds and one-quarter of a
cubit (50-2 in.), the unit of length being the car- penter’s cubit, that is to
say, the Hashimi cubit, which admits of no variation, but is of uniform length
in all Muslim countries (Appendix 1, p.159 ).

221Analysis of the length of the bow should pe in the following measurements: the
upper dustar (d. al-yad) should be one-half and one-eighth of a cubit (16-36
in.) and the lower dustar (d. ar-rjT) one-third and one-quarter of a cubit and
one-half of a gfrár (15:82 in.); the grip should be one-eighth and one-half of
one-eighth of a cubit (4:91 in.) and be broad, not rounded (i.e. presumably, in
transverse section either ovate or elliptical from belly to back), so that it
may not turn in the hand, and, further, "to provide a finger hold',* be scooped
at the sides (Fig. 6); the length of the upper siyah should be one-quarter of a
cubit (6: 55 in.), the lower styah measuring one-quarter of a qtrár less (0-28
in.). They say that, like a growing branch, the thickest part of the limb should
be that adjoining the grip. It should then taper until its most slender portion
is formed by the tip of the siyah. The upper limb should be a little fuller than
the lower and, unlike the latter, not be weakened by curtailment (for, the limbs
being of unequal length, the lower must be a little weaker, if both are to flex
equally when drawn). The length of the bow described is intended for really
average men and truly medium heights as they are in our time.  Some people,
however, have shorter siyals and longer working limbs. In such cases the re-
cognized length of the upper siyak is one-sixth of a cubit and one and
one-quarter girdts (5:72 in.), the lower siyah being five girdts exactly (5-45
in.). The upper dustár will measure one-half and one-eighth of a cubit and
one-quarter of one-eighth of a girág (16-4 in.), amounting to one-third of the
bow. The lower dustár will measure one-third and one-quarter of a cubit and
one-half and one-quarter and one-eighth of a girdt (16-23 in.). "The grip will
measure one-eighth and one-half of one-eighth of a cubit (4:91 1n.).!?

Flight bows (gisiyy as-sabq) should have short limbs, long necks, and speed of
recovery ('sur'ar!  at-tarjih). The way to string bows of this type is first to
straighten out the curvature of tbe neck and dustár on each side (i.e. by
retracting the siyaks from the reflexed position) and then to flex
"simultaneously? and to the same degree the centre of each limb,®* For every ten
rapis $03 o. 7 Ib .) of bow weight there should be one dirkam’s weight (47.6
gr.) of silk for the string, such

222terial being raw, wound silk that is new and extremely strong. Such is the
information that we win on the subject,


ü

223
Crossbows are of different types. The- Franks, for instance, nan the jarkh, the
Maghrebis (North Africans) the Jagshah, the Persians and Turks the zanbiirak and
Islam (the Mamelukes?)  the bandiig,* Crossbows of this type (or ‘the
last-mentioned type’; the text is not clear) are the most useful for
land-forces. For naval operations, on the other hand, the most useful type is
that made of yew (zags). The limb of this weapon should be made of two opposing
staves (i.e. pre- sumably, one of two halves of a split length is reversed and
joined to the other), and its stock should be of boxwood or orange.


ON BOWS 9

224
In the West (i.e. North Africa and Muslim Spain) crossbows are a great favourite
and are the weapons of preference. Those who use hand bows, however, deprecate
them. My own view is that in the manœuvres of "mounted! combat, in the desert,
and on expeditions the hand bow is 2 better and more serviceable weapon, whereas
in fortresses, sieges, and ships greater power and advantage will be derived
from the crossbow.!?


5 !  ^

225
A


A

226yg

] INE '

227
Side view Front view



228

Fic. 6. Grip oF AN INDO-PERSIAN Bow

229
jü


The first thing that an archer must look at in his bow is the grip
(a/-gabdah). The main point about this is that it should be just right for the
hand and be neither too big nor too small for it.  To examine the grip, he
should grasp it with the whole hand and all fingers after first pushing back the
flesh of his palm away from the base of his fingers into the centre of the
hand. He should then look to see whether the tips of his fingers touch the heel
of the hand. If they do, then the grip of the bow js too thin for the hand. If,
however, there is half a finger's width or less to spare between the far border
of the finger-tips and the heel of the hand, the size is just right. A greater
or lesser gap is unsuitable, for if the grip is too thin for the hand, the tips
of the fingers will touch its heel, in which case the grip will turn in the
archer's hand at the draw, and he will not . Shoot well,

230If it so happens that the archer can only get a bow that is too thin in the
handle for his needs, .he should build up the grip by affixing leather tailored
to the size of his grasp so that the - grip will then fit the hand. In extremes
of temperature and for sweaty hands a piece of leather on the grip is
particularly useful.


20 SARACEN ARCHERY

231
So far as the power of the bow is concerned, authorities on archery are agreed
that the skill of the archer entirely depends upon his using a bow that is
within the limits of his own strength” and physical power. In time past archers
have only been concerned with those points on which they differed and prided
themselves, namely, technique and grouping (jam'), without anyone ever
mentioning so much as a word about the strength of the bow. Nevertheless, it is
said that one should not shoot with a bow unless it is less powerful than
himself and that no one ever shot with a bow that was even a fraction too strong
for him without its revealing his faults and in- capacity, doing him harm,
ruining his shooting, and emboldening his rival without his knowing it.


COMMENT

232
There is a striking omission in the preceding text: our author offers no
glossary of the termino- logy applicable to the anatomy of the bow, such as is
to be found, for example, in Arab Archery, Pp. 13-16. In the CD groups of MSS
the subject is discussed, but we suspect the relevant section to have been drawn
from some other literary source and inserted for the sake of complete- ness,
Since we have reason to doubt whether a¥ the terms listed were valid for the
time and place with which we are here concerned—indeed some may well have been
unknown to Taybughà—.  we relegate them to Appendix 2,


1. Old Arab Bows

233
(a) Bows of the Hejaz. According to our understanding of the text, three basic
kinds of bow were used by the Arabs of the Hejaz: (i) that made of a single
stave; (ii) that made of two staves joined together; (iii) that backed with
sinew and lined with horn. From some remote period the Beduins, or nomads, had
used the first two kinds, while the sedentary population had developed the
third. According to Arab Archery, pp. 10-11, (i) could either be a self bow or
consist of a single stave split lengthwise, in which case it bore the name fig,
while (ii) consisted of two staves so split and was termed sharfj. (The
technical implications of this information are dis- cussed in some detail by
Faris and Elmer, ibid., p. 11, n. 5 and p. 158.) As regards (iii), there is no
meation of its being a weapon of the sedentary Hejazis; it is said without
further explanation


ely really important point made in Arab Archery is that all these Hejazi bows
were basically a stave of wood shaved down.

234(b) The vásitiyyah. In Arab Archery this is said to have been the composite bow
(magni ah, murakkabah). One source quoted by Hein (Isl, XIV, pp. 357-58) speaks
of it ss the *Hejazi intermediate’ (al-Hijdziyyah al-másitiyyah). There can be
little doubt that it was the Arabian composite bow (cf, Arab Archery, pp. 11-12;
Hein, loc. cit.), but whereas all sources which we have been able to consult
agree that the bow was not, as might be supposed, so called after the city of
Wasit (on the Tigris between Baghdad and the Gulf), none of them explains in
which respect the bow occupied an intermediate position. After careful
consideration we suggest that it was intermediate, not from the point of view of
size, but from the point of view of construction and relative proportion of its
components, having perhaps more wood, but Iess horn and sinew, than such
composites as the Persian or Turkish. The difference would be immediately
obvious in cross-section. (A variety of cross-sections of composite bows may be
seen in the Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford. See also Balfour, £47, XIX, pp. 220-50
and RAI, LI, pp. 289-309.)

The question of old Arab bows, of which our author had probably little, if any,
first-hand knowledge, is a subject requiring investigation in its own right
since there is a good deal of conflicting information in our sources—one of the
most important is Tbn Sidah’s Mukhassas—

235
ON BOWS II


which cannot be considered here, Taybughi's interest js the composite bow of his
time and area,

236which can scarcely have been of Arabian provenance. He so takes the composite
for granted that

nowhere in his work does he ever trouble to apply the epithet to a bow, and
there is much to

237suggest that his knowledge of the more primitive bows which he mentions, quite
obviously

by way of historical introduction and from a desire to link the bow with the
Prophet’s native second-hand,

238
Hejaz, is


2. Construction of a Composite Bow

239From the foregoing chapter and the sources of information indicated at the end
of this section a picture can be developed of many of the details of the
construction and form of the bow described by our author.

The design of composite bows varied with time, place, climate, and the purposes
for which they were intended (war, hunting, flight shooting, etc.), but the
basic method of construction was the same throughout the East.

240The first component to be worked was the wooden core, which to a large extent
determined the final form of the bow and served as the foundation to which the
horn and sinew were later glued, This frame on which the bow was built was made
in three basic parts:

(i) The grip, or handle. This had to be relatively thick and rigid. A bow that
bends in the hand upon drawing is normally unpleasant to use, as it kicks when
shot and is, on that account, usually inaccurate. The thickness of the grip was
determined by its need to fit the hand.

241(ii) The dustárs. These were the two working parts of the limbs which took all
the bend. The wood in these sections could either be flat or slightly oval in
shape and about one-eighth of an inch thick along the centre line. The side to
which the horn would later be attached was, as a rule, coarsely scored to
increase the surface area exposed to the glue.

(ii) The szyahs. Working outwards from the grip, we find continuous with each
end of the dustars the ridged portion of the siyah. Here the wood was curved
towards the tip and shaped to give, in cross-section, a shallow triangle which
gave the structural rigidity required in the end of the bow. The width of the
siyah tapers sharply into the tip, ot ear. Initially the ears were longer than
in their final form, with temporary nocks cut into the *wrong' side to aid
manufacture (below Fig. 7).

242In details the construction of the wooden core varied according to the desired
final shape of the bow and the quality and characteristics of the wood available
to the craftsman. While we cannot be too dogmatic about these details, we may
say that in Turkish bows the grip was commonly fashioned from one piece of wood,
while both dustdr and siyah were formed, without join, from another. In the
Persian design, on the other hand, we find the grip, dustdr, and siyah made from
three different pieces of wood, and this method is sometimes encountered in
Turkish bows. Sino-Tatar bows almost invariably have a long unbroken strip of
bamboo for both dustárs and the grip. The latter has an additional piece of
wood, or riser, glued to the back to give the required thickness. The most
complex are the types from central Southern India, in which grip, dustár, the
ridged section. of the siyah, and the tip, or ear, were each made from different
lengths of wood, thus giving seven separate pieces for the construction of the
core.

This brief account will give a rough idea of the more common variations that can
be found in existing bows. Other examples of construction could be cited, but it
is not our purpose to penetrate too far into this field.

243The various sections of the composite bow were united by means of single
fish-tail, or V- form, splices and glued together. At the junctions between the
grip and the dustárs, and the dustars and the styahs, the abutting surfaces of
the wood were smoothly tapered in depth so that each section merged into the
other, thus making it difficult to detect the end of one section and the
beginning of the next in the finished article. In bows that have been stripped
down dissection


12 SARACEN ARCHERY

244
Siyah



245

^ NEN —

246
Grip


ee Mn Fic. 7, PARTS OF THE WOODEN Cort or A Composite Bow Dotted Jine on siyah
shows final form.

247
bas revealed such joints extending over a length of about 3 in. Hence, although
the actual grip might only be 5 in. long, the piece of wood on which it was
built could be about 12 in. in length from point to point of the two 'V's to
which it was tapered for fitting into the fish-tails cut in the dustars
(Fig. 7). Some splices exceed 5 in. in length, but a measurement of this order
is unusual,

In MSS of the CD group and also in Arab Archery, pp. 11-12, it is clearly
indicated that the wooden core was to be in five sections, viz. the grip, the
two dustárs, and the two sivahs.

248The width of all known composite bows increases at the place where the knots at
the ends of the bowstring are intended to rest, the purpose being to avoid any
risk of the string's slipping around the siyah, thereby causing the bow to
capsize. Too long a string, for instance, might well slip in this way and cause
the bow to spring violently back into its unbraced position. Such an occurrence
would shock both bow and archer and could easily do serious harm to one or both.
It was essential, therefore, that that part of the bowstring which ran from knot
to knot of the end loops should not touch the siyah. If the design of the bow
required siyaks so shaped as to predispose to this hazard, string-bridges were
often fitted to support the loop-knots at the points where they would normally
rest. Those from the Middle East were usually of bone, ivory, ot
horn. Disc-shaped and measuring about Ẹ in. in diameter, they were scooped or
hollowed in such a way that the sides rose towards the outer edges of the bow to
form small cradles for the loop-knots (Fig. 1o). Since no mention of such a
fitting has been found in any MS that we have examined, the recurve of the tips
of the braced bow would seem to have been such that this device was not
needed. :

The dimensions of what our author considered to be the best of Syrian Mameluke
bows are clearly given in the text as well as the length of the string it
required (below, p. 22). The only point open to doubt is the bracing height,
i.e. the distance between the grip and the string of the braced bow, Given the
length of the various components, the bracing height would determine, inter
alia, the angle through which the siyah was curved. A reconstruction is shown in
Plate 18.

249The craftsman, then, shaped and assembled the components of the wooden
core. Having regard to the rigidity required in the grip and siyaks, on the one
hand, and to the flexibility demanded of the dustárs, on the other, he could use
different woods for different sections. Our


ON BOWS 13

250



251Fic. 8, METHODS oF SPLICING (a). Grip and siyah showing splicing into dustdr
before trimming.



252

(b). Alternative method.

253
. author indicates that work on the core was carried out in the autumn, a time
of the year when the cooler weather and higher humidity would retard the
setting-rate of the glue and give adhesion superior to that obtainable in the
hot, dry summer.

While the glue was setting, the horn strips with which the belly would be lined
could be sawn and prepared, Water-buffalo and certain types of goat and antelope
could provide suitable material for the purpose. Since the horn of European
cattle tends to split into thin layers when subjected to stress, it would not
meet the needs of the Oriental composite bow. In dissected bows the horn has
been found to taper in thickness from between } in. and } in. at the grip to
half the amount at the centre of the dustár. Continuing to taper, it ends a
little way past the joint between the siyah and the dusrar, The thickness
depends to some extent on the proposed weight of the finished bow.

254Next, the horn was glued to the belly of the core, To ensure maximum adhesion,
the two , Surfaces were usually scored to increase the surface area exposed to
the glue. The horn was

"firmly bound to the core, care being taken not to press out too much of the
glue in the process, The reflex of the bow was controlled by a cord tied between
the two tips, and at this stage it was held in the form of a shallow ‘C’
(Fig. 9). For the glue to dry thoroughly about three months would be needed,
after which sinew could be applied in warmer weather. Warmth would be essential,
for on a cold day sinew is very difficult to handle and, if affixed under such
conditions,

255
I4 SARACEN ARCHERY


would almost certainly make for a poor bow. Hence the stipulation in our text
that work of this kind should be undertaken in spring.

256Some modern European authors, notably Payne-Gallwey (The Turkish Gomposite Bom,
p. 4), have stated that the sinew was prepared from neck tendon, but we have
proved by experiment that this is useless for two reasons. Firstly, it is far
too elastic for the purpose for which it is intended and, secondly, it will not
beat out into the fibrous form in which it needs to be applied, but will break
up into small pieces. (It can, however, be used when cut into short lengths to
build up the triangular section of the siyah, and we know of instances in which
it has been employed for this purpose.) Leg tendon, on the other hand—preferably
that of deer according to the findings of Dr. G. Fabian of Godolo, Hungary—is a
suitable material It can be dried, beaten out into fibres, and then impregnated
with glue for combing into a layer along the back of the bow.  It is important,
however, to ensure that the temperature of the glue is not so high as to destroy
its elasticity, which is sensitive to heat.

Having reached this stage, the bow was reflexed into a complete oval, and the
tips were tied together, a cord being led from the latter around the grip to
control the degree of bend (Plate 2).  The sinew was thickly applied over the
ridged portion of the siyah, leaving it, in section, almost an equilateral
‘criangle with increased rigidity. Of all the components in the composite bow,
the backing of sinew was the most important, and by correct application of the
material a skilful

257



258At a later stage the ibranjak is inserted here


Fic. 9. WOODEN CORE WITH HORN APPLIED

259
craftsman could compensate for defects both in horn and wood. It was applied in
one, two, or even three layers, but the full reflex was only achieved after
completion of the final layer.  Experience shows that at this stage of
manufacture the two horn strips, however carefully butted in the first place,
are almost sure to part, thereby creating a gap, which, if left as such, would
cause unfair shearing stresses to be thrown on to the bond between wood and horn
when the bow is braced and drawn. To remedy this defect, a slim piece of
packing—nearly always to be found in Oriental composite bows—was. inserted
between the ends of the horn strips. In existing bows it is of bone or
ivory. This component was the ibranjak (see Glossary, s.v.), the purpose of
which proved so problematical to Faris and Elmer (Arab Archery, p. 162, where it
is - tentatively suggested that it may have. been a shock-absorber). It is
mentioned later by our author on a number of occasions without any explanation,
but it was, as Mustafa Kani says of the chelik—the term applied to the ibranjak
of the Ottoman flight bow--the piece which united


ON BOWS 15

260
the two halves of the bow (Hein, Isi., XV, p. 263. Cf. Klopsteg, p. 115). It
served the additional purpose of helping to maintain the reflex shape in the
grip of the bow and of adding to its rigidity.  It should be noted that where
reflex in the handle does exist, it is slight, and the centre part of most
Middle Eastern bows is virtually straight except in so far as it is shaped to
fit the hand.

When the glue had thoroughly set, the impregnated sinew was hard enough to be
shaped with a file. After removal of any obvious irregularities and hardened
exuded glue, the bow was strung for very short periods at a time so that the
bowyer could study the curves of the two limbs.  The process of tillering then
began so that both limbs, when adjusted, might be brought to the correct
curve. During this time the bow would periodicaily be braced and drawn gradually
to increasing degrees until it could be brought to full draw with even balance
in both limbs. Heat and formers were used to assist in shaping the limbs. E a

261In the last stages of manufacture the sinew backing of the bow was veneered with
tree bark applied diagonally in strips so as to prevent it from splitting when
the bow was drawn. To make it waterproof, it was varnished and then painted for
the sake of appearance. A sinew binding beside the nocks strengthened the wood
against any danger of its splitting under the impact of the string’s loops at
these points when the bow was shot. Turkish and Persian bows are usually found
to have a strip of horn let into the tip to strengthen the ear (Fig. 10), but we
have come across no mention of this,

From our text, as it stands in AB, one is apt to conclude merely that a
composite bow took

262
Horn Insert



263



264
inew binding covered wit thinleather



265

ae

266
Ridged Section


bridge

267
FIG. 10. Siyah or A BASHKIR Bow (EIGHTEENTH CENTURY)


16 SARACEN ARCHERY

268
a year or so to make, but the wording of the CD MSS is such that we are left in
no doubt that each of the various processes had its own particular season and
that each and every one of the four seasons of the year was involved. In other
words, our ‘full year’ need have nothing what- ever to do with the time taken to
produce a bow, though it could certainly be completed within that period. (On
the view that Turkish bowyers must have spent about five years on the processing
of a bow, see Klopsteg, p. 52.) What, in our view, is implied is that each
process had to be carried out only at the correct time of the year, otherwise
the result would be unsatisfactory.

Main Sources: In addition to Hein, Klopsteg, and Arab Archery, see Balfour, JAI,
XIX; idem, JRAI, LI; Payne-Gallwey, The Turkish Composite Bow, London, 1907;
H. S. Hamlin, ‘A Study of Composite Bows’, in Archery,
April-Sept. 1948. Information has also been derived from correspondence and ean
with Messrs. J. Flinton, E. McEwen, D. Skinner; from MS notes of H. Ingo Simon;
from a study of sections of bows in the Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford, and of the
H. Ingo Simon Collection (bows), Manchester Museum.

269
3. The Painting of Bows


Our author says nothing whatever about the painting of bows, but in D*, 108b,
there is an addendum to the text giving instructions for the painting of bows
with sandaris—presumably, Mum c, 2 colourless resin from the tree of.that
name. The directions may be summarized as

270OWS:—

Mix any desired colour with liquid sandarac, Apply and allow to dry off. Next,
apply a varnish of pure sandarac and dry off. Now coat the surface with strong
(? text uncertain) ox-gall. Apply .  paint of another colour to give, for
instance, white on black, or red on green, or blue on red, and then place in the
hot sun, When appropriate, sprinkle carefully with wine vinegar to bring up the
colours in the design and dry off. Next wash off the gall and dry. Now apply
sandarac by itself and leave. If desired, apply another colour in similar
fashion.

271
4. Dimensions of Bows The measurements given for parts of the bow are summarized
below. Those for the grip do not include the tapered portions fitting into the
dustars.  Column 1 shows the normal measurements as given by our author.  Column
2 shows the variations which he records. (A different set of variations is to be
found in CD (c.g. C*, 392; C*, 152), but since they are liable to confuse we
omit them.)


2

272



273


Upper siyah — 655 in. 5°73 in.  Upper dustar 16:36 35 16:40 33 Grip ; 491 » 491
» Lower dustár 15:82 y» 16°23 » Lower siyah — 627 » 546 55 TOTAL 49°91 in. 48°73
in.

274
It will be noticed that the author gives the total length of the bow shown in
column I as 502 in., so there would appear to be some minor discrepancy in the
figures. For all practical purposes, however, the difference is negligible.

The lower limb of Taybughà's Syrian bow was shorter than the upper, and,
although this characteristic is found in other designs, most composite bows from
the Middle East that have so far been examined have limbs of É equ length—an
advantage in that they could be used either way up.

275
ON BOWS 17


Compared with those of existing bows, our author's styahks seem very short and
his dustars long.  This would result in a slight decrease in the efficiency of
the bow owing to understressing of the materials from which it was made. On the
other hand, it would be a little more reliable in war and less liable to
fracture or damage.

276To illustrate these differences, we have drawn up a table of detailed
measurements made from 2 selection of existing bows. It should, however, be
noted that since it is usually very difficult to decide exactly where one
section ends and another begins, the table below may contain minor


etrors.  Bow Siyahs Dustars Grp ^ Toul (from nock) (nock to nock) Bashkir* à
12:0 in. 9:9 in. 425 in. 58-0 in.  Bashkirf 105 » 25 s 50 » SEO 5 Persian} 100
5, Ij5 s $9» 540 » Ottoman flight§ 9'0 4 9'5 » 45 » 4I°5 » Indian || FO y II'j
15 59 5» 460 5, Indian; 9'5 s I3'O y S'O s 5Q°9 » Indian** 9255 II'5 5» 4°0 95
45'°5 » Indianft 975» I25 5 AO 55 485 s»

277
The Khorasanian bow to which our text refers would at the most have been only 37
in. long, which is short even by comparison with the Ottoman flight bow,

The following additional information occurs in D+, 15b and is of some interest:—

278“They (sc. the Turks, Persians and Iraqis) divide the bow into half at the
halfway mark on the grip so that whichever limb is the weaker is taken by them
to be the shooting limb (i.e. the upper). The Khorasanians do not believe in
applying "too much! sinew to their bows . . . and accordingly use less of this
material than any other. With the Iraqis, on the other hand, sinew and horn are
used in equal proportions. This is because of climatic differences in these
countries.  Experts say that if you are in a very hot country, you should soak
the sinew with good, pure, well-prepared TOR glue because it gives moisture and
suppleness suited to such a country and excessive heat...

Specifications given by other authors cannot always be directly cotipared as
they may refer to a bow of different design from that described in the present
treatise. It is, however, interesting to record the observation of the author of
the NibZyak (see p. xxxiv) that the longest bow should be 12 gabdaks (‘fists’,
i.e. about 39} in.) and the shortest 8 gabdahs (about 26 in.). The longest
siyahs should, he adds, be 16 fingers (about r3 in.) and the shortest 1o fingers
(about 8 in.).  (Nihayah, Ch. vii, p. 72.) If our equivalent for the gabdah is
correct (see Appendix 1), the length ~ of the bow must have been measured by a
different method from that indicated by Taybugha.  It may have been based on the
shortest distance between the nocks or tips of the braced bow.

279
5. The Flight Bow


The mention of long necks in connexion with the flight bow probably implies that
the ridged section of the siyah in the kind of bow with which the author was
familiar extended a few inches-

280
* Colt. Ingo Simon, Manchester Museum No, 0,7633.  1 Coll. D. G. Quick and
similar coll. E. McEwen. © t Coll, Ingo Simon, Manchester Museum No. 0.7646.  §
Coll Ingo Simon, Manchester Museum No, 0,7624.  i| Coll. W. F. Paterson.  *
Coll, W. F. Paterson.

** Coll, W. F. Paterson.

281Tf Coll. Ingo Simon, Manchester asin No. 0.7652.


18 SARACEN ARCHERY

282
further towards the grip than in the case of the war bow, thereby shortening the
dustár. That in its turn would give a higher speed of recovery to the tips of
the bow when the string was loosed. This would normally result in a lower degree
of accuracy, since the two limbs of the bow might not travel forward exactly
together. Such an effect, however, would be of no con- sequence in flight
shooting where discharge velocity is the all-important factor. Far greater
stress would also be thrown on to the shorter working part of the limb, making
such & bow less suitable for warfare.


6. Crossbows

283
In Arabic the crossbow is termed ‘foot-bow’ (qaws ar-rijf). The origin of the
term is simply explained in Mardi t-Tarsüs's description of the type of crossbow
with which he was familiar in the reign of Saladin: *.. . they (sc. crossbows)
are drawn by applying the pressure of both feet together with the strength of
the back, for, in order to pull, one must fasten around the waist a well-tanned
and toughened belt of ox-hide, at the end of which arc two hooks to take the
string.  One then puts the feet inside the bow . . . and with the back pulls the
belt at the point where the



284

Fic. 11. CRossBow WITH Corp AND PULLEY (See Glossary, s.v. jarkh.)  (From
Payne-Gallwey, Crossbow, Fig. 30.)

285
. ON BOWS I9


two hooks are until the string reaches the catch (gaff) located in the stock
. . .’ (Tabsirah, 88a-b.  : Cf. Cahen, BEO, XII, pp. 132 and 152, n. 12.)

286Another type of crossbow-— possibly a later development—required the use of one
foot only.

The foot was placed in a stirrup fitted to the front of the stock
(Fig. 3b). This was the gaws ar- _ rikab or ‘stirrup bow’. Europe distinguished
between the two by the terms arbalista ad duos pedes and arbalista ad unum pedem
(Payne-Gallwey, Crossbow, p. 60).

287Because of the relative instability of nomenclature and technical and semantic
developments, it would be unwise to be dogmatic about the meaning of certain
terms used by our author in connexion with crossbows. Some information on Middle
Eastern crossbows and arbalests may be derived from Reinaud, Huuri, Cahen (see
Bibliography), and others, but there is insufficient technical detail to enable
us to determine their construction.

Jarkh. From Ch. 16 and glosses in CD (e.g. C}, 22b; D4, 172) it is clear that,
so far as our author is concerned, this was the stirrup bow. It shot a bolt.

288Zanbürak, "little wasp’. What meaning the term had for our author we cannot
say. It appears, at some stage or another, to have been a weapon which shot a
strong, heavy bolt of the same name closely resembling the Western quarrel
(Reinaud, pp. 211-13; Cahen, 153-54).

Bandiig (more correctly bundug). This was the gaws al-bunduc, a type of crossbow
that shot pellets (bundug) of metal of that name (Reinaud, pp. 217-18 and Hein,
Isi., XIV, p. 304. There is further mention of the missile on p. 139). In the
present context the term is not to be under- stood as the firearm of the same
name (ET*, art. Barüd). (Nor in the case of zanbirak.)

289Lagshah. We have no information at all on this weapon.


7. The Naval Crossbow

290
Because damp sea air could have a most adverse effect on glue, the composite
construction with wood, horn, and sinew, which was often employed in crossbows
before the introduction of steel limbs, was unsuitable for naval operations. The
best solution to the problem lay in the use of the more simple, but more
reliable, wooden limbs. The yew recommended by Taybugha is one of the finest bow
woods obtainable, but there are problems in working it as the has to pay close
attention to the run of the grain. By taking a length of the wood and splitting
it in half, two lengths can be obtained with an almost identical run in the
grain. If one length is then revetsed and joined to the other, the two limbs
should be almost identical. In this way the.  bowyer’s problems are eased, and a
better bow results. Such is the most probable explanation of the ‘two opposing
staves’ indicated by our author.


CHAPTER 4 ON BOWSTRINGS

291
Experience with bowstrings led to the use ofa string (zatr) which is twisted
lengthwise (musadda) from new, wound silk of high quality. Our knowledge of this
particular type we acquired from masters who came from Persia, and in Persian it
is called (cha! For flight shooting it is unrivalled by any other known
type. There is also the *Cathayan' string which originated in Cathay and was
subsequently widely adopted in other countries, It is also made from raw, wound
silk—and glue.?* It is more durable than the first kind, is stronger in the
bowcase (i.e.  resistant to abrasion and pressure when the bow is carried strung
in its case) and is also more serviceable. All other kinds of string are
inferior to these two (below, p. 22).

As regards the weight (wasn, i.e. mass) of the string in relation to the weight
(kayi, Le, draw weight) of the bow, experts hold that the most satisfactory rule
to observe is that contained in the following verse:

292
‘As weighed by a balance the string should be one-third of one-tenth of
one-tenth of one-tenth of the weight of the bow.’


What you do is to ascertain first the weight of the bow in Damascus ratis and
then the relative weight of the string it requires including the two end loops
and, possibly, two saysaraks (a saysarah in this context being, most probably,
some sort of protection against chafe where the loop fits into the nock of the
bow). If you work out this formula, you will find that for every thirty rapis
(122 lb.) there are six dirhams Damascus weight (285 gr.) because one-tenth of
thirty ratis is three, or, in other words, 1,800 dirhams. One-tenth of that is
10 dirhams, one-tenth of which is eighteen, one-third of which is six. This is
the reckoning on which there is a consensus of expert opinion, both ancient and
modern. They point out that a fine string increases cast, but that an arrow
discharged from such a string will flirt. j In the flight shooter’s string (watr
as-sibaq) there should be one dirham's weight (47-6 gr.) of new and extremely
strong wound silk for each ten rath (40-7 Ib.) of bow weight. It should then be
twisted lengthwiset in the appropriate manner, A heavy string will damage the
neck of a bow "e reduce its efficiency (because of the extra weight to be
carried forward by the limbs of thc W). : 3 ; To weigh a bow, you should string
it and then fasten its grip to a peg in the wall or some similar

293rice. Next, you should nock a full-length arrow (sahm ramām; below, p. 27) on
the string and Secure it so that it leaves neither the string nor the grip. You
now hang your rajls on the string (presumably, in a container)* and continue to
add to them until the arrowhead attains the middle of the grip as in the greater
draw (kashf bayád; below, p. 128), or comes back as far as the - archer's reach
at full draw (wafa’ ar-rémi). The sum of these razis will be the draw-weight of
the bow in question. AT a

Some archers weigh the bow with a pulley. What one does in this case is to fix a
pulley to a ‘second? peg set ‘on the same! wall in line with the first, ‘the bow
being held perpendicularly by

294
20


ON BOWSTRINGS 21

295
the grip to the first peg!. The archer then fastens a rope to the string ‘at the
nocking point!, puts the rope into the pulley, and attaches his raz/s to the end
of the rope. It is argued that this method reproduces the manner in which the
bow is drawn. The first method, however, is the sounder of the two. Only those
who wish to exaggerate the power of the bow and make a show of its ; strength
adopt the other method (which is inaccurate because the pulley introduces
friction loss, thus enabling the weight of the ratis to be increased beyond the
weight of the bow).5 Any person weighing a bow should be quick to remove the
raris from it, otherwise he will weaken it, and it may well break (since a good
bow at full draw is close to breaking point and will, if so held for any length
of time, lose some elasticity). It is said, and rightly so, that a thick string
will be more tive at short range, and a thin one at long.  . . For crossbows
there should be one zgiyyah (almost 5} 02.) of string to every roo ratis (407
lb.)  Damascus weight.** This means that for every ras] of bow weight there
should be one-half of a dirham's weight (23:8 gr.) of string. The lathe
(i.e. the bow proper of the crossbow) is one-fifth of the string,* and so the
length of the actual bow should be multiplied by five. Four strands should be
twisted lengthwise from this, and then from each end one should turn back ‘and
knot! the two loops of the string. This, then, is the way to obtain the length
of the string of the particular crossbow involved.*



296

Weights

297
FIG, 12. WEIGHING A BOW WITH A PULLEY



298

— bd

299
" Along string will improve cast and put increased sharpness and speed into the
arrow. If it is too long, however, ‘it will slip around the side of the siyah,
and! the bow will turn itself inside out (i.c. spring violently back into its
relaxed, reflexed position), and the string will lash the archer’s forearm and
chest. A short string, on the other hand, will give greater accuracy!? and make
for a safer and more stable bow. It does, however, give a slow arrow. A string
of medium length is more appropriate than either because it gives "perfectly
adequate! speed and good grouping, and is safe for both bow and archer. =a "

If the length of the string is assessed from the length of the bow, the string
must be shorter than the bow by one-half of one-sixth. The way to do this is-to
ascertain the length of the bow : from nock to nock and then to deduct one-half
of one-sixth from the result. What remains will be the length of the string for
the bow in question, measured from the centre of the ends of the two

300
22 SARACEN ARCHERY


loops once the string has been knotted and stretched to prevent it from
lengthening out later, The nock of the bow.is, of course, the place where the
loop of the bowstring fits. The way to

301
reflection.)

fOnce the bow is strung,!!* place some suitable object between the string and
the centre of the grip and if—by the appropriate cubit of the trade—it is
one-third of a cubit and one-third of a girdt long (9*1 in.) (or, ‘one-quarter
of a cubit and two-thirds of a girár* (7:5 in.), according to a technically more
probable variant!?), then the string is just the right length (below, p. 23).

302If the bow is of medium size, being neither long nor short, the size of the
string’s loops should be such that one can insert the middle three fingers, or
to be more precise, thc index finger, the middle finger, and the third finger of
the right band. In size it should be two girdfs (22 in.)  of the cubit specified
above, if the siyah is five girádjs (5-5 in.) of the said cubit. The rule for
the loop, then, is that it should take three fingers "or measure (roughly)
one-third of !* the length of the siyah. The smaller the loop, the greater the
cast. A small loop, however, is not without hazard, for it can break the siyak
at the top end (ie. at the tip). Too large a loop, on the oth:r hand, will
reduce the cast of the bow and can break the siyah at the bottom end (i.e. at
its base where the siyah joins the dustar).


COMMENT r, Materials

303
As already stated in our introduction, the basic requirements of a good
bowstring are that it should be light, strong, and without stretch once it has
settled to the bow. The strings recom- mended by our author were made of unspun,
raw silk whose threads were twisted together to form a string of the required
length. Glue was used to bind the strands together, the purpose being not only
to prevent entanglement upon removal of the string from the bow, but also to
increase the strength of the string. Wax could be used instead, but it is not
mentioned in our text.

Although silk is Taybugha’s one and only choice, it is noteworthy that Mardi,
writing in the twelfth century, makes no mention of any material other than
animal hide—and human skin!— though he advocates a mixture of silk with
horse-hair for the string of the siege engine called ziyár (Tabsirah, 83a,
97b-98a. Cf. Cahen, BEO, XII, p. 130). The author of Arab Archery, pp.  94-95,
while mentioning silk, does not attach the greatest importance to it, but deals
at some length with strings made from camel-hide. ‘To produce a string of this
material, a strip of leather was subjected to various processes of stretching,
twisting, smoothing, and, finally, coating with gum arabic. (On the use of
hides, see also Hein, Zs/., XV, p. 7.) It is possible that in early times
Turkish strings were made of horse-hair (Hein, ibid., p. 1. Cf. Klopsteg,
p. 54).

304
2. Loops '

Most existing strings for use with Oriental composite bows are made with the end
loops quite separate from the main string. The latter is a long skein of thread
formed by winding around two pegs set at the required distance apart. The loops
are knotted into the ends of the skein, as shown in Fig. 13. The same knot was
used in bowstrings throughout the East from China to Turkey.  Though more rarely
found, some strings were made longer $o that they could be knotted back upon
themselves to form the end loops.

305
ON BOWSTRINGS 23


The advantage of this second type was that a string-maker could supply prepared
lengths which the user could knot to suit his own bow. This would certainly be
the more practical approach for the archer in combat and was, we suggest, that
adopted by our author, whose interests in the present treatise are primarily
military. The first method would impose the necessity of having the skeins of
exactly the right length, which would mean that they would have to be made to
order unless the archer was prepared to perform the task himself.

306



307Fig. 13. BowsrRING LooP-KNOTS


| 3. Bracing Height

308For accurate shooting, the bracing height, or distance between the grip and the
string of a braced bow, must be constant. Any alteration will affect discharge
velocity, a greater height reducing that velocity and a lower height increasing
it. Too low a height, moreover, will give rise to an unstable bow. The bracing
height achieved by a bowstring of specified length in relation to a given bow
can, therefore, be an important guide to anyone attempting to determine the
design of a bow. Some versions of our text give measurements amounting to 9-1
in., while others give the equivalent of 7-3 in. A reconstruction of Taybughà's
bow from all other specifications at our disposal suggests that the latter
figure is correct. (See p. 170.)


CHAPTER 5 ON ARROWS

309
i


The best arrows! should possess the following characteristics. They should be
roundly hewn, be of hard, solid wood, and be entirely devoid of knots,
splinters, and pitting. They should be free from distortion and rotate quite
evenly when twirled on the finger nail (below, p. 30), especially when you spin
them ‘with right finger and thumb’? as they rest upright on their heads?  fin
the centre of the right palm!.* The swiftest arrows are those of slim contour
with low fletchings and thick fore-shaft (musaddar; see Glossary). An arrow of
this description is termed a ‘candle- form’ (q4lib ash-sham'ah). It should be
thickest at the arrowhead and then gradually taper until it reaches its
narrowest at the base of the nock. The nock (fig) should be circular and of the
same size as the thickest part (badan) of the shaft. The most accurate arrows
are of the ‘barley-grain’ contour (gab ash-sha'trah) with a middle thicker than
the ends. They should be equipoised when balanced without head or fletchings.!5
Straight-hewn (mustawi n-naht) arrows are those of uniform thickness from end to
end, As long arrows they are inferior to the other two types, but as short they
are better than either. (Short arrows are presumably those for use with an
arrow-guide or with a crossbow as opposed to the normal ‘long’ arrows; below,
p. 29.)

310The nock should be of medium size, for a thick nock will slap the grip, and you
will then spoil your shot. The thin nock, on the other hand, is weak (and will
readily break). For short arrows the archer should put a thread around the
circumference of the string and then, dividing it into three, make the nock the
size of one of these thirds. It follows from this observation that as every bow
has its own particular string, the arrow nock should in each individual case be
one- third of its circumference. In the same way you also determine the size of
a crossbow nut (jawzah) and its aperture (i.e. in the crossbow). This will be
dealt with later. Khart arrows (?) are useless.*

1

311
Z i EALL


3 ' FIG. 14. ARROW SHAFTS I. Candle-form.  2. Barley-grain, 3. Straight-hewn.

312
24


ON ARROWS 25

313
ii


` Specialists say that the most suitable heads for both maydán! arrows and
jyaghig, or war, arrows are those with a weight one-seventh of that of the whole
shaft plus its head (nasl). Any- ! thing short of, or in excess of, this
specification is wrong. For, if the head is too heavy, the arrow will gad
(taharraka) on its descent to the mark, while if it is too light it will gad as
soon as it leaves the string. ‘This is quite apparent in the case of crossbow
bolts. The heavier the head, the more effective it is at short range, "but at
long range it will topple and do little damage!.?

314It is related that Jahir (al-Balkhi; below, p. 39) told the following story: ‘I
had heard,’ he said, ‘of a certain Persian against whose arrows no man could
protect himself owing to their power of penetration. So I sought him out and
worked for him for a time, though I was afraid to ask any questions. Eventually
he went out hunting one day. By this time I had joined the family and so I was
able to say to his wife, “There is something I should very much like you to do
for me.” *And what is that?" she asked. “Please show me your husband's bow,” I
said.  So she gave me one of his bows, and I drew it. Much to my surprise it was
as light (/ayyin) as ours. “Good heavens!” I exclaimed. “Can your husband pierce
any kind of armour with a bow as light as this?” “Yes,” she replied, “there are
two things about it which enable him to do so. Just look at his bowstring and
his arrowhead.” To my surprise the string was as thick as one’s finger and the
arrowhead exceedingly large.’* We have put this story to the test and found that
it is as Tahir says.

The most reliable and effective arrowheads are those which are either triangular
or square (Le. in cross-section; Fig. 15). These are for use in battle and for
piercing iron and all kinds of

315
Tang



316

Fic, 15. ARROWHEADS AND NOCKS

317
I. Yaghiiq from N.W, India.

2. Yaghkg from Doge’s Armoury, Venice.

3183. ‘Oh ? (From Saxton Pope, Bows and Arrows, Plate 14.)  4. Chisel-head from
N.W. India.

5. Maydant Em head (conjectural),

3196. Turkish A

7. Indo-Pessian nock.

320
26 SARACEN ARCHERY


armour. There are various types of arrowheads, of which the most useful are
those just men- tioned. The haydari head (a broadhead for hunting?)? is not as
good as either of these two kinds, Target heads (nugii al-ahdaf) should be
rounded.!® There is also a kind of head resembling an olive (Fig. 15.3), which,
some masters have told me, is the most useful of all arrowheads for battle and
for piercing shields and which in Turkish territory is used by archers more than
any other type. They also have an arrowhead resembling a chisel. Like the
maydant, it is cylindrical, but its tip is not pointed, On the contrary, it
looks as if it has been cut ‘obliquely’ from its "lineal! mid- point and tapered
‘to a blade! on two opposite sides so as to present the appearance of a scalpel
(Fig. 15.4). The edge "of the blade! is as wide as the diameter of the body, Y
have tested this head and found that it will pierce the laminae of a brigandine
(gargal)"! as well as it is possible to do so.

321The art of mounting the arrowhead lies in observing the following rules, The
head should be evenly rounded on all sides, no one side being heavier than
another.!** It must be so made that it is perfectly straight from its point to
the end of its tang (silám), the end of the tang being narrower than its
base. The wood of the shaft should be bored ‘right in the centre!!? to a
distance that is less than the length of the tang of the arrowhead so that its
end can be inserted into un- bored wood in its natural state (khám) (and so fit
tightly).14 The war head, and indeed any arrowhead designed to penetrate iron,
should be made of steel.1* In these cases the tip must be tempered, and a
fraction snipped off if it is intended to pierce laminae of armour!* (below,
P. 31). This technique is a well-guarded secret, and the result a weapon capable
of piercing armour plates and shoulder-guards.1? The heavier it is, the greater
its power of penetration.!* This is well known.


As regards fletchings (rish), there are different types. The best and most
serviceable are vulture feathers, after which come those of the eagle (below,
p. 31). Right-handed feathers make more accurate arrows and are suitable for
maydanis. Left-handed feathers, on the other hand, give a swifter arrow and are
suitable for flight- and war arrows. The way to distinguish the right-handed
from the left-handed is to put the nock of the arrow to your breast, and if the
feathers lean over to the right, they are right-handed, whereas if they lean
over to your left, they are left-handed (the converse is the case in English
practice), It is wrong to fletch the one arrow with both types.  It should be
fletched either wholly with right-handed feathers or vice versa. The rule for a
set (nadab) of maydént arrows is to have them all exactly alike. For when
feathers differ in kind none of the arrows are any good (below, p. 31). The most
useful fletchings are the makyál or ‘balance pan’ (?) variety?” closely followed
by ‘gazelles’ (below, p. 32). The longest fletchings should be no more than six
finger-widths and the shortest three, Fletchings that are long and low (Ja) are
better than those which are short and high ('ait). At their highest they should
be no more than a finger-width. Four feathers hold a truer course and give
better grouping and greater accuracy, but three are faster and give greater
range (asbag).*? There are some archers who use six feathers, three low and
small and three high and long, but too many feathers retard an arrow.  For best
results there should be one-half of a finget-width between the feather and (the
beginning of) the nock.?! The feather should be cut from the base, and the tips
left like those of a swallow’s wings.** On a flight atrow you fit only three
fletchings.

322They say that tail-feathers are better for an arrow than wing-pinions because
the latter will not lie straight on the shaft. Nevertheless, secondaries are
better than tail-feathers because they are more pliable (below, p. 31).

Every feather has a belly and a back, so see to it that fletchings are put belly
to back. For when they clash and are belly to belly, the arrow is ruined, as is
also the case if one feather is higher or longer than another.* An archer who
shoots arrows that are fletched (murayyash) with left- handed feathers should
aim for the right of the target and vice versa.?* :

323The centre portion of a feather gives a better fietching than either of its two
extremities. A


ON ARROWS 27

324
feather on a shaft should not be twisted (maftül). The further the fletchings
are from the nock, the better the cast and the truer the course.*** The same is
true of light feathers.**

In one of the Maghrebi manuals fon archery! the author says that the skilful
archer should fletch some of his arrows?" from the right wing and some from the
left so that if he is shooting and the wind then comes in from his left, he can
shoot with fletchings taken from the right wing.  If, on the other hand, the
wind comes in from his right, he can shoot with left-handed fletchings.  Under
such conditions arrows so fletched are more suitable and will not fall short as
others not so fletched will do. The author also says that one should bend the
rear end of the feathers*® in the direction to which they themselves incline,
for if they are bent over backwards (Le. as opposed to bellywise), they will
cause the arrow to gad. If one spirals them too much, however, the arrow will
fall short in its course. The best fletchings are tail-feathers.?

325iv

Archers differ on the size of the arrow an archer should use.?* The correct
measurement should be such that it will allow the archer at full draw
comfortably to bring the head of the arrow to the distal phalanx of the thumb at
the centre of the bow’s grip as the middle phalanx of the right index finger
(shahadak) is brought right back to the lobe of the ear. The right elbow should
be on a level with the shoulders, as also the hand grasping the bow. All should
be on the same level (ie. in the horizontal plane), none of these parts being
higher ‘or lower! than another. The optimum, then, is the length of the draw
(jadhb) of which an archer is capable and which will at the same time permit a
graceful appearance.?!* The whole person should be evenly poised by which, ‘to
repeat,! is meant that the right elbow, the shoulders and the left fist should
be on the one level, none of these parts of the body being higher or lower than
another.

326The length of the maydáni arrow in our time and country (i.e. Syria)** is, in
terms of the carpenter’s cubit, one and one-eighth cubits and one-half of a
girar (30 in.). Such an arrow is called tamám (‘full length"). This measurement,
of course, is intended for really medium men.  A tall man (with long arms) will
have to have it longer, while a short one (with short arms) will be unable to
bring it to full draw ('ajaza ‘an istifd’ thi) and will in consequence have to
have it shorter. The war arrow should be one girdg (1-1 in.) less (ie. than the
standard maydant).


v

327
To find the correct balance (awzdn, lit. ‘weights’; he means the correct
position of the centre of gravity), first place the arrow across the left index
finger "with the nock towards the palm of the handV** and balance it. When it is
evenly poised like the beam of a balance, reduce the length of it by a fist "by
grasping it with your left hand, your little finger being placed!* at the
fletching end. "This is to be done without allowing any shift in the balance
already established.!?5 Next, with another arrow you measure the distance from
the nock (kàz) to the little finger and then, by reversing this gauge, measure
the same distance from the arrowhead. If the point which was on the little
finger now reaches the left index finger (sabbabah)—some say the middle
finger—the arrow is correctly balanced (in other words, the centre of gravity
should be half a fist, or slightly less, towards the head from the middle of the
arrow). If ‘the measure! reaches beyond 'the left index finger’, the head is too
heavy, while if it falls short, it is too light `

vi ;

328The nock (káz) should be of medium size, neither too small nor too big. The
arrow for use

with the jarkh should ‘easily fit into!** the nut and neither shift about in it
nor fit too tightly.

329
To determine the correct balance of jarkh arrows and darts (nabl) intended for
use with arrow- guides, you reduce the length of the arrow by a fist from the
direction of the head and then place


28 SARACEN ARCHERY

330
it on the left index finger and balance it. If it rests there like the beam of a
balance, it is correct.  If not, what we have already said above also applies
here. As regards the galam (a type of cross- bow bolt; below, p. 29), it should
balance with the base of the head on the ieft index finger.  With the arrow
designed for the mukkulah®’ the balance is between the proportions of one- third
and one-quarter, the quarter being taken from the direction of the head and the
remainder from the direction of the nock. If it wili balance in this manner, it
is just right.

A heavy head is better than a light one in all cases, especially in the case of
arrows for use with the mukhulah and the jarkh and also in the case of darts. A
light head is useless. There is 2 type of bolt (nab?) with a tip of iron the
size of a small chickpea, the shaft (badan) being thinner than the tip and only
as heavy as the whole head.** The upper portion (i.e. the shaft) is of wood and
of the same size as the nock. To be correctly balanced, it should equilibrate on
the left index finger with one-third of it in front and two-thirds behind. They
say it will fly without fletchings, but fletchings do help it. It is designed to
penetrate armour.

331The more slender, or thinner, an arrow, the greater its velocity, whereas the
thicker it is, the more inefficient and slower it is.


COMMENT

332
Arrows may be divided into two basic types: (a) the long arrow (sahm sawil, or
collectively, nushshdb), measuring about 30 in. in length and designed for use
with the hand bow, and (b) the short arrow (sahm gasir). Originally intended to
be shot from the normal hand bow by means of an arrow-guide (majrá, mijrdt, on
which see Ch. 26), the ‘short arrow’ amounted to what we should in fact call a
dart. A term frequently applied by our author to darts is nab?  (sing. nablak),
a word which he regularly uses also in the sense of ‘crossbow bolts’. Measuring
about 16 in. or less, both darts and bolts were of a number of different kinds
and appear to have been named according to the salient features of their design
or performance, etc.


1. Long Arrows

333
(a) Yaghlig, or harbi. This was the war arrow, the head of which was virtually a
spike of square or triangular cross-section. This design was the most effective
for the penetration of armour and mail, Although well made, it would have been a
mass-produced article manufactured to a standard specification, unless specially
ordered for persons of importance. Before an engage- ment the ordinary archer
would have been equipped with a quiverful of selected arrows most suited to his
needs, but, his quiver once emptied, he would have had to accept whatever the
supply-train or arsenal had to offer.

(b) Maydani. As the name implies, this was an arrow designed for use in the
mayddn, or training-ground, in which the archer practised, competed, and, on
high days and holidays, dis- played his accuracy and skill before the ruler or
the highest officers of state, or both. Whether the term mayddni was applied to
more than one kind of practice arrow, it is difficult to say. It certainly
applied to the target arrow (salu al-hadaf). One of the archer's prized
possessions would have been a carefully matched set of target arrows of the
finest craftsmanship fashioned from the best available materials and identical
one with the other in weight and point of balance.  Though basically of the same
weight and balance as the war arrow, the target arrow would have had a length
and weight that had been carefully adjusted to suit the archer and the bow he
used.  - The head was round in cross-section and pointed either as an ogive or a
cone. An important and interesting reference to mayddnis is to be found in D,
where we are told that ‘they should be hewn from well-proportioned billets of
uniform length, thickness, and weight. Each of the batch should then be
equilibrated one by one after the manner of the beam of a balance to establish
the centre of gravity. This done, a mark should be made to indicate the point at
which the

334
ON ARROWS 29


‘top and bottom are brought into harmony one with the other. Whenever the marks
are found to ‘coincide in a number of arrows, they should be made into a set for
a round (#adab), At the shorter of their two ends they should be fitted with
well-proportioned heads of the same weight and quality, The fletchings should
also match.’ (Dt, 20a; D*, 49b.). -

335(c) Amaji. This was a type of mayddani with a blunt head which was used by the
mounted archer for shooting at marks placed on the ground (Ch. 15). They
doubtless took hard treatment, and for this reason are likely to have been more
roughly made than the target arrow. Limited

into butts of earth or sand would be assured by a blunt head (n. 10 above),
which would not be liable to damage in the same way as a pointed head; ~

336(d) Sabgi. This was the flight arrow which was used when competing for distance
regardless of accuracy. It was essential to have it as light and as strong as it
was humanly possible to make it.  The wood of the shaft would be carefully
selected and, though thinned to the highest degree, it had yet to be
sufficiently strong and stiff to withstand the impact of the string when shot.
There is reason to suppose that both long and short arrows were used for this
purpose. (Ch. 19.)

The technique of flight shooting, which is different from that of precision
shooting, was brought to a very high degree of perfection by the Ottoman Turks
whose arrow design has never yet been surpassed. (For details, see F. Isles,
SAA, vol. 4, 1961, pp. 25-28.) -

337(e) Haydari. In our view the term is suspect; it seems very probable that we
should read janwart ‘animal, for usc against animals’, i.c. a hunting head. (See
Glossary, s.v. haydari.)


2. Short Arrows

338
(a) Darts. References to these devices are frequent in Arab works on archery,
Although they would appear to have lacked the weight to penetrate armour or
mail, we can at least be sure that they were effective as a harassing device,
especially against unprotected horses of enemy cavairy.  Practical trials show
that they are projected at a high velocity with a low trajectory. This factor
makes for accuracy, and at short range they would certainly have been most
unpleasant to face.  At long range it would have been possible for massed
archers to put down a barrage of such missiles as far as about 400 yards.

MSS of the CD groups offer some information on darts. The following details have
been extracted from them (some versions are more accurate and/or informative
than others):

339
No arrow for use with a guide should be longer than 2 spans (shibrs) and a
digital phalanx ('ugdah; in all, about 16 in.). The war variety, that is, the
Ausbdn (*hailstones"), should measure 2 spans, while the düdZni should, with the
head, be 1j spans. The smaliest arrow for use with a guide should measure no
less than } span (about 2} in.). Into this category fail the types jardd
(‘locusts’), the length of which ranges from 1 span to $ span; and the 'usfuri
(‘sparrow-like, bird-like"). For best results the short arrow should be half the
length of the long, or, in other words, 2 spans. (C!, 32b; C*, 55a; C, 25a; D,
23a; D*, 52b.): From this last sentence it would seem that the long arrow was 4
spans long. As it measured 30 in. (above, p. 27), the span would be about 7} in.
Further information on darts may be obtained from Cahen, BEO, XII, PP. 132-33,
and Arab Archery, pp. 124-31, etc.  . .(b) Gressbow bolts. MSS of the CD groups
again supply some information. The relevant portions follow closely upon those
concerned with darts (see references immediately above, section 2 (a), and our
observations on the versions). The specifications that are given relate to
‘bolts for use with particular crossbows the detailed construction of which is
not known to us.  Those mentioned are (a) the 'aggar, ‘murderer’, which, if the
definitions of Cahen (BEO, XII, 152, n. 10) and Huuri (Gesch, p. 120) are valid
for the context, was a crossbow drawn by placing the feet on its limbs, and (b)
the rikdé ‘stirrup’, which, as its name indicates, was the stirrup bow mentioned
above (p. 19) as gatos ar-rikáb. The details may be summarized as follows:


3o SARACEN ARCHERY

340
Crossbow bolts (nabl gatos ar-rijT) should be the length of the distance from
the (fore?) end of the grooved guide (majrá) along the top of the stock to the
nut. (The length would have been in the order of 12 in.) For shooting at short
ranges they should be 2 fingers shorter, In the case of the ‘aggdr the (head
of?) the shaft should be level with the breast of the stock (sadr al-gadib;
i.e. presumably, the front end) for precision shooting and opposite the pin

(mistnar) for distance. For shooting at short range a bolt should have a
socketed head (baziak) .  of iron weighing 3 dirhams (142-8 gr.) with a shaft
(sam) of 6 dirhams (285-6 gr.). This is the right size for the rikab. For the
‘aggar, on the other hand, the weight of the bolt head should

341be 31 dirhams (166-6 gr.) and the shaft (khashab) 7 dirhams (33272 gr.). In D*,
532, it is held that an arrowhead with a tang driven into the shaft with glue
and bound with sinews is stronger and more effective than a socketed head (which
is always liable on impact to break the shaft at the shoulder of the socket) and
will admit of great accuracy. (Cf. D+, 23b-242.)


3. The Spinning Test

342
Both ancient and modern archers have used this method to determine the
straightness of a shaft. It is simple and effective and, to master, needs very
little practice. The thumb-nail is placed together with a finger-nail to form a
shallow ‘V’ ia which to cradle the arrow close to its centre of gravity. The
shaft is then spun with the other hand, If true, it will spin smoothly, whereas
if it is in any way distorted, it will rattle between the nails.

The technique described here is termed idrar by Ibn Sidah who says that, when
spun, the arrow should produce a lowing or whining sound that can only come from
a straight and correctly shaped shaft of sturdy wood (Mukhassas, VI,
52). Perhaps a ‘hissing sound’ would be a more accurate description.

343
4. Weight of Long Arrows In our text nothing is said about this very important
topic, but some information is offered in the CD MSS. We summarize here some of
the weights supposedly specified by the ever-quoted Tahir al-Balkhi (C1,
292-b. Cf. C*, soa—b; C3, 21b-22a; D4, 21a; D°, so0a—b. See also Arad Archery,
pp. 113-16, 174). The ranges given obviously refer to effective target ranges
and not to maximum ranges. (In the first column the weights are those of the
Baghdad standard, on which see Appendix 1.)


Arrow weights, etc. Bow weight Range | in Ib. in yds.  * 8 dirham arrow (3856
gr.)  30 ratl bow 26-8 100 cubits 54°5 8 dirham arrow (385:6 gr.)  40 rapi bow
3575 125 cubits 68:1 8 dirham arrow (385:6 gr.)  50 rat] bow 447 150 cubits :
81:75 IO dirham arrow (482 gr.)  60-70 rar! bow §3°6-62°5 160-170 cubits 87-92:5
12 dirham arrow (578-4 gr.)  100 ratl bow 89:4

344
270-300 cubits 147-1635


ON ARROWS 31

345
Specifications of arrow weights presented in a more detailed manner are to be
found in the uNihayah and have been investigated by us (Latham and Paterson,
JSS, X, 1965, pp. 253-61).  . {Since no figures are given for bow weights,
however, they cannot be compared with the above.  ‘The lightest possible arrow
is given as 304 gr. and the heaviest as 600 gr., the first for use with the
lightest bow, and the second for use with the heaviest.


5. Arrowheads

346
; —ÉU M — a TE” - information has been obtained. On the results of these trials
the reader would do well to consult Archery (Badminton), Ch. xxiv, S. Pope,
Hunting with the Bow and Arrow, pp. 46-49, and E. G.  Heath, JSAA, vol. 4, p. 18
(on the bodkin head).

The tapered spike, or bodkin, head gives the best penetration of armour or mail,
and this was -the type used so effectively by the old English archers against
armoured cavalry. The weakest part of this, or indeed any, arrowhead was the
tip, for, if too fine, it could bend or snap on impact with armour and fail to
penetrate. To a large extent, however, this hazard could— given correctly
tempered steel and a reasonably square hit;—be overcome by slight blunting of
the tip. When shot by strong and skilful archers, arrows fitted with such heads
were capable of an astonishing degree of penetration, and actual examples can be
found in abundance in Hansard's Book of Archery where we read, for instance, of
an arrowhead so effective that it not only trans- fixed the protected leg of a
horseman in armour, but even penetrated his saddle and went on to deal a mortal
blow to his horse (p. 200).

347The broadhead is of little use against armour, but is most effective for
hunting, for which purpose it was designed.

Two unusual shapes are mentioned in the text, namely, the olive and the
chisel. Although it is doubtful whether the penetrative qualities of the former
would be equal to those of the bodkin, the latter would overcome any possible
weakness liable to arise from a finer point and would be fully effective against
armour.

348
6. Feathers


In English practice a feather is described as right-handed or left-handed
according to the.  results obtained by viewing the top surface from the base of
the quill when held towards the person. If the web of the feather runs to the
right from the quill, it is right-handed, and vice versa.

349When a fletching is prepared, part of the quill is left on the base of the
web. If this is not

done, or if too much of the quill is cut away, the feather loses much of its
natural stiffness and, accordingly, its quality. We are in complete agreement
with the author that all fletchings on an arrow must be of the same hand and
that the centre part of the feather is superior to either of the two ends. There
are no valid grounds for preferring right-handed or left-handed feathers.

350English fletchers have always favoured wing-pinions for strength. The difficulty
presented by their natural curve (below) could be overcome quite simply by
placing the prepared fletching in a hot, damp cloth for a minute or two before
affixing it to the shaftment as this temporarily softened the quill and allowed
it to be fastened in alignment with the axis of the shaft. Tail-feathers, though
not as tough and strong as wing-pinions, are straight and therefore easier to
handle. The tail- feathers of both the vulture and eagle, however, have for all
practical purposes no weakness so far as the archer is concerned and,
furthermore, they are stronger than goose pinions which were those most widely
used in the West.

The web of a feather has a natural cutve, and even when a straightened quill i
is fastened i in alignment with the axis of the shaft, the arrow will spin in
flight. It is for this reason that the feathers on an arrow must be of the same
hand, for, if of different hands, they will result in

351
32 | SARACEN ARCHERY


unsteady flight and excessive drag. With a broadhead it is generally accepted
that a higher rate.  of spin is needed to counteract the effect of a side wind
on the blade, and in this case the quill is set slightly out of true to increase
the spin in the natural direction given by the feathers. Archers still debate
not only the merits or otherwise of using such spiralled fletchings for all
arrows, but also the question whether four fletchings should be used as opposed
to three. It is not the place here to enter into their unending controversies on
these points.

352The shapes into which feathers have been trimmed after being set to the
shaftment have varied widely over the centuries and in different areas. All the
illustrations and miniatures in the numerous MSS which we have so far examined
for the period which immedistely concerns us show them cut to a low arc of a
circle. As observed in note 19, the two names applied by our author to one type
of fletching are uncertain. In A we find makyi and aktaf. The first of these
terms (for which in B, er al. we have the apparently meaningless makbiif) means
‘measured’ or ‘a measure’, while the second means ‘shoulder-blades’. For the
latter the reading of B*, b$, and 5 is akuff ‘pans of a balance’, which, so far
as we can judge, could only mean that the fletching was trimmed to a contour
similar to that of the rim of a balance pan. Such a line would correspond to the
design seen in miniatures. It is possible, however, that we should read akzaf
(second vowel short) with the meaning ‘broad-shouldered’, which, from a
grammatical standpoint, would make better sense. It is also just possible that
we should take makedl in a sense similar to that of - mukattal ‘round and
compact’, ‘stout and short’, or the like.


Barbs-together forming the web | . . Nock

353



354
Quill


FrG, 16. PARTS OF A FEATHER AND FLETCHED SHAFT VIEWED FROM Nock To English
archers the feathers on thc shaft are right-handed (p.26)

355
The term ‘gazelle’ (ghizlan, sing. ghazal) docs not suggest any particular
shape. It is interesting to note, however, that our author recommends that the
rear ends of the feather be left like the tips of a swallow’s wings, thus
following the natural line of the rachis. This cor:esponds to the martin trim
mentioned in Arab Archery, p. 113, and it may well be that to some the
appearance would be evocative of a fleeing gazelle.

The Maghrebi writer’s view that right-handed feathers should be used when the
wind comes in from the left, and vice versa, should be disregarded. ‘There is in
fact no different in performance between left-handed and right-handed feathers
either as regards direction of flight or behaviour in a crosswind. On this point
we are supported by Dr. P. iia icles assistance we gratefully Sada d

356
7. The Size of the Nock


Taybugha’ s recommendation that the nock should be one-third the circumference
of the string is basically sound. Applicable to long and short arrows alike,
this rule would give a good fit, In D there is the following observation: ‘A
long nock gives.a more accurate and stable arrow than a short one, though the
latter gives: greater speed. The most appropriate lengths for a nock

357
ON ARROWS 33


ate those which will take the width of two bowstrings, or the fletchings from
their highest point or the arrowhead from the point where the tempering
ends. The converse is true in the case of flight arrows." (D+, 202; D*, 49b.)

358That the depth of the nock for the normal long arrow should be equal to twice
the thickness of the string is reasonable. If the converse is true in the case
of flight arrows, this may be taken to mean that the flight nock should only
equal one thickness. The point about the fletchings and.  tempering would appear
to be that both the height of the feathers (i.e. their breadth from the quill)
at their farthest. from the shaft and the length of the tempered tip of the
arrowhead should measure the thickness of two bowstrings. They could, therefore,
be used as a gauge.

In 5, 13a-b, the interesting view is expressed that in the case of the flight
arrow the depth of the nock should be one-third of the thread (used to measure
the circumference of the string), in the case of the maydani one-half, and in
the case of the giga/, or gighaj (see Glossary and Ch. 15) two-thirds.

359
8. Lengths of Arrows


The only right way to determine the correct length of an arrow for any given
archerds for that archer himself to come to the positisn of full draw and then
measure. Other methods can only give an apptoximate result, and some degree of
error is almost inevitable. For target shooting, the archer, then as now, would
almost certainly have had his own set of arrows made to measure, but in combat,
as already stated, he would have had to accept a standard length supplied by the
arsenal. It is logical to suppose that such arrows would have been made for
archers with the longest draw; for too long an arrow would be safer than one
that was short, the reason being that in the heat of action there would be a
danger of the archer's overdrawing a short arrow and bringing the head inside
the bow. With luck the arrow would merely glance off the wrong side of the bow
and be wasted. The real hazard, however, would be that he could put the arrow
through his own hand, or, if the head of the arrow was to hit the inside of the
grip, the shaft would break, the rear

360
CHAPTER 6 ON THUMB-GUARDS


Kushtuman? (‘thumb-guard’) is an arabicized form of a word borrowed from the
Persian. In Persian the term is angushtvan? ("ünger-protector') and in old
Arabic jam ah or, it is said, khai ah,”

361There are many kinds of thumb-guard to suit individual tastes and purposes,
Experience attests the value of that which is of a single layer of leather
without either padding* or lip (saysarah}, but it demands a great deal of
practice for the archer to be able to retain the string (with a steady
hold). For this reason a lip has been added, and 'now in its modified form this
type! is the most useful and convenient thumb-guard for all archers, Those who
have long thumbs should see that the lip is thick, while those with short thumbs
should keep it thin. This kind of guard will show up faults in locking (on which
see below, Ch. 10), and for this reason thumb- guards of bone and horn® are
often used. This type, however, even though it can conceal an archer’s faults,
may well break when most needed and thus put a man out of action. Some guards
are therefore made of gold or silver.? There are people, such as the Turkmens,
who use a plain circular band as a thumb-guard so that it can be kept on their
hands at all times like an ordinary silver signet ring (after the Chinese style?
Plate 7), This is an excellent type for persons who have to endure the hazards
of expeditionary operations (presumably because it could be kept in place for
immediate use). Some people even shoot without any thumb-guard at all, and by
dint of intense practice they become accustomed to so doing. There is no greater
asset than the ability to shoot in this way if one is so endowed."

The golden rule for a thumb-guard is that it should be exactly the size of the
thumb, neither bigger nor smaller.” According to Tahir, the use of a thick lip
will increase cast (atrad E-s-sahm ; in other words, be better for distance),
but greater accuracy!? will be attained (e.g. in target shooting) by the use of
a thin ore. The best policy is to adhere to that to which one is accustomed.  If
one has no particular habit in this respect, then it is better to follow the
instructions which we have given above, — -

362
_ COMMENT


It is regrettable that Taybugha should be so brief on such an important
subject. The author of Arab Archery is much more informative and offers some
interesting details on the making of

363
‘horn and leather thumb-guards (pp. 123-24),


1..Construction of the Guard

364
(a) The leather guard. This was made from a T-shaped piece of leather. The ends
of the horizontal portion were carefully sewn together to form a loop into which
the thumb could fit, while the stem was left to cover the inside of the pad at
the end of the thumb. The thumb-tip


34

365
ON THUMB-GUARDS 35


and knuckle remained uncovered, The authot’s assertion that the loop must fit
the thumb is . fully supported by experience. If it is too tight, discomfort
results at the draw and, if too loose, it is liable to be pulled off by the
bowstring upon release. It is also clear that the length and shape of the lip
need to be tailored to the requirements of the individual. A fine leather lining
and a lip like a smail broad bean is recommended in Arab Archery, whose author
adds that a slight groove should be impressed into the surface of the leather
(p. 123). This, presumably, would follow the crease of the thumb and would make
for consistent positioning of the string during

366
shooting.

(b) The drawing-ring (Middle East), The manufacture of a drawing-ring clearly
required far more care and attention than the leather guard, In existing
specimens the hole into which the thumb fits is slightly oval so that the ring
has to be turned through ninety degrees from its final position to slip over the
thumb-joint. When finally turned to its shooting position, it cannot possibly
slip off the thumb if the fit is correct. The shape of the inner surface depends
on the contour of the thumb. If too little of the inside of the lip is cut away,
the string will put excessive pressure on the inside of the thumb, while if too
much is cut away it may be very difficult to retain the string on the inner
upper surface of the ring during the draw. The curves of the inner and outer
surfaces of the lip are, to some extent, complementary, and their design must be
balanced against the shape of the thumb for which they are made. A ring would
therefore have to be made to measure by a careful craftsman with an eye for
detail, and all existing examples show this to have been the case. A
well-fitting ring is a pleasure to usc, and there can be no doubt that a really
successful one would have been highly prized by its owner. (See Plate 7.)

367



368b. Thumb


a. Leather Guard Ring

369
Fic. 17. THUMB-GUARDS


In addition to literature already indicated either above or in the notes the
reader might profitably consult J. Flinton, ‘Musing on the Thumb Ring’, JSAA,
vol. 1, 1958, pp. 38-39; W. A. Browne, “The Thumb Ring in An’, FSAA, vol. 2,
1959, pp. 34-37; W. F. Paterson, "Thumb Guards’, 7.544, vol. 6, 1963, pp. 14-15;
W. E. Bishop, ‘On Chinese Archers’ Thumb- rings’, Archery, vol. 26, no. 11,
November 1954, pp. 10-14; G. C. Stone, Glossary of Arms and Armor, New York,
1934 (reprinted 1961), s.v. ‘Archers’ Rings’, pp. 14-17; E. S. Morse,
Bull. Essex Inst., XVIII passim; idem, Additional Notes. -

370
36 |. - SARACEN ARCHERY 2. Drawing with a Ring or Guard


The archer pays great attention to the exactness of his grip upon the string,
for even the smallest variation can affect a shot. The position of the fingers
or the thumb relative to the string is to some extent a matter of personal
preference according to the best results obtained by the individual.

371We shall sec in due course (pp. 51, 55) that the archer is recommended to take
the string in the crease formed by the thumb-joint, or else a fraction either
above or below it towards the tip of the thumb. In any of these positions the
string can lie either straight across the thumb or at a slight angle. Given all
these variations, to say nothing of the relative position of the tip of the
thumb on the middle finger and the forefinger upon the thumb, it can readily be
seen how faults can occur when using a leather guard. The worst fault is Jack of
absolute consistency in even the most minute detail of one's hold or lock upon
the string.

Archers will be aware that a good, clean, and unvarying loose of the string is
difficult to achieve and demands constant practice and attention to
detail. Until this is mastered shooting will be erratic. The importance of this
aspect of shooting cannot be overemphasized.

372With the ring, wide variations do not occur, and it is easier to be
consistent. The two main reasons for this are that the string can rest only in
one position, and the movement of the tip of the thumb across the middle finger
is limited by the lip of the ring. Fence our author's statement that the ring
will be preferred by the inferior archer.

Several years’ experience of shooting with a leather guard permits the view that
it gives its user superior control and that the bowman who has mastered the
technique, will, if shooting for accuracy, outshoot an opponent who is using a
ring. It should, however, be noted that for flight shooting the ring gives a
sharper release and is therefore to be preferred for that purpose.

373
CHAPTER 7 ON THE FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHERY?


Among countless numbers of fable? bowmen those most famed for their knowledge
and skill in archery are Bahrüm Gir ibn Yazdigird ibn Shàpür Dhü l-Aktāf, Tahir
al-Balkhi, Ishaq

374ar-Raffa’, and Abū Hashim al-Bawardi (on all of whom, see Comment). These were
the men who won renown for their methods of shooting, and from ancient times
right up to the present people have been adherents of their teachings. At-Tabari
(p. 40) it was who transmitted their techniques, though his own method was
eclectic.

Each of these Great Masters? had a method of his own which suited the
requirements of his trunk and limbs, depending, as will be mentioned in due
course, on whether his measurements were long, short, or medium and whether he
had a broad chest with a long arm-span or vice versa.  Rarely will any one man
in all respects be of exactly the same proportions as any single one of the
Masters. On the contrary, physical proportions are bound to differ from one
person to another.  You will, therefore, appreciate that all methods must really
be eclectic (ikhwiyari) according to the different requirements imposed by the
size of one’s trunk and limbs.

375There are differences of opinion on what constitutes the fundamentals of archery
(usti ar- ramy).* According to Abū Hashim, they are four: grasping, locking,*
drawing, and releasing.  To these Tahir added sighting, thus making them
five. The majority of archers follow this teaching and quote the following
verses:


‘Archery is the finest thing that God's Messenger (Muhammad) recommended, and
the manliest of men are those who can be proud of their shooting.  Its
fundamentals are five, of which the first is the grasp, followed by locking,
drawing, releasing,

376
and sighting.’

Some add nocking and make the fundamentals six. This is the number we adopt for
the simple reason that a fundamental of anything is that which is indispensable
to it, and, as nocking is indispensable to archery, it is therefore a
fundamental. There are some who add stringing, but strictly speaking stringing
is connected with the art of bow making because it requires a knowledge

377
DL


how to prepare strings.

378
COMMENT I. The Masters of Archery and the Great Masters


A Persian ruler of the Sasanid dynasty, Bahram Gir, or Vahram V (A.D. 420-38),
is frequently accorded a prominent position in archery literature. In the works
of pocts and illuminators— mainly Persian—his legendary feats as an archer and
hunter are a commonplace. He is “Bahram, that great Hunter’ whose name is known
to many through Fitzgerald's Rubdiydt of Omar

379
37


faT4OS, UNV SHOVIQ

380



381



382
WEE g


^v

383



384ueuqejso


Ny pep?  1219Ho S. vy Visuad indeysin, o ^ uBlyay SYYELES a + .  Virg
pisauqy. NVISIYV WL

385



386
SUDIHSY a


ON THE FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHERY 39 Khayyam. In technical writings certain styles
of shooting and points of technique are not in- frequently ascribed to, or
associated with, the Sasanid kings, and in this connexion the names of Ardashir
(Ardashir I, son of Papak, A.D. 226-41) and Khusraw (Chosroes I, A.D. 531-79)
are to be found in addition to that of Bahram Gir (see, e.g. Nihayah, pp. 63-66
et passim). :

387An examination of Mardi’s Tabsirah, which we know to have been written in the
time of Saladin, reveals among acknowledged exponents of archery a preponderance
of persons whose names bespeak their role as repositories, transmitters, and
continuators of the techniques of Central Asia and the Iranian cultural orbit of
medieval times. Typical are the following examples: as-Sarakhsi, ‘of Sarakhs’,
between Meshed and Mery (Khorasan), at-Tirmidhi, ‘of Termez’, on the Upper Oxus
near Balkh (Khorasan, now in Uzbekistan), al-Harawi, ‘of Herat’ (Khorasan, .
now in N.W. Afghanistan) as-Samarqandi, ‘of Samarkand’, principal town of
Transoxiana (now capital of the province of Samarkand in Uzbekistan). Names of
this kind, though generally less numerous than in the Tabstrah, could easily be
cited from other Arabic and Islamic treatises on archery (e.g. Hein, 751, XIV,
pp. 300, 307, 313, etc.). Furthermore, the ascription of this or that technique
to the men of Merv or Balkh, for instance, or to the people of Khorasan or
Transoxiana is not an unusual phenomenon (e.g. Tabstrah, 73a; Niháyah, Ch. xiii,
p. 69, Cf.  Arab Archery, index, s.v. Khurasan, etc.).

The dates at which the archers named by Mardi flourished—among them Tahir,
Ishaq, and Abi Hashim mentioned in the first paragraph of this chapter—have so
far defied our attempts at discovery. Indeed, for all the pre-eminence with
which Tahir, Ishaq, and Abū Hashim subse- quently emerge in Islamic archery
literature as the Imams, or ‘Great Masters’, of technique, we have yet to
uncover any biographical details that will shed light on their dates. To judge
from their names, they were certainly all Muslims and therefore could not have
antedated the first quarter of the seventh century A.D., and, as they are
mentioned by Mardi, the second half of the twelfth century can be taken as a
rough terminus ante quem. To suppose that they lived no earlier than the middle
of the eighth century would, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, be a
reasonable guess since it was from early Abbasid times that large-scale
recruitment of troops and officials from Khorasan and Transoxiana began
(Introduction, p. xxiii). Other possibilities suggest themselves, but hypothesis
is no substitute for factual evidence.

388In the matter of dates this is as far as we can go. As regards Abū Hashim, it is
important to dispel all doubts surrounding what, for convenience's sake, we will
call his cognomen. The problem is that archery literature confronts us with four
possibilities, viz. al-Bawardi, -Bárüdi, -Mawardi, -Nawardi. So far as
Taybugha's treatise is concerned, A? and the MSS of the B group limit the choice
to al-Bárüdi and al-Bawardi. Of these the first is the relative adjective of a
small town in Lower Egypt, while the second is that of Abiward, or Baward, a
town and district on the northern slopes of the mountains of Khorasan in an area
now within Turkmenistan - (U.S.S.R.) Having regard to our observations in the
first two paragraphs above and bearing in mind the reputation and prowess of the
archers of Khorasan, we take Abii Hashim al-Bawardi to be the man’s true name
and believe Faris and Elmer’s—and indeed Hein’s—Abi Hashim al- Mawardi to be
erroneous (Arab Archery, p. 16, et passim and Isl., XIV, p. 329. Cf. also
Nrhayah, passim) To an Arabist it will be obvious how readily the rather unusual
Bawardi could be transformed by a scribe into the much more familiar Miwardi or
the easier Bariidi, or else be corrupted to the meaningless Náwardi as in the
Tabsirah (43b).

The second element of the name Ishaq ar-Raffa’ is taken by Faris and Elmer to be
ar-Raqqi, ‘of Raqqah', a place in northern Syria (op. cit., p. 16. Cf. Hein,
loc. cit.), but this reading runs counter to an overwhelming weight of evidence
in favour of ar-Raff@ and is an obvious ortho- graphic error. .

389As regards Tahir al-Balkhi, the second half of his name links either him or his
forebears with Balkh, now a village in northern Afghanistan, but once a great
capital of Khorasan and a centre renowned, among other things, for the
excellence of its horsemen and archers (cf. Ritter, Isl.,


40 ." ^* SARACEN ARCHERY

390
XVIII, p. 120). In Arab Archery, p. 114, he is made out to be the grandson of
Shápür Dhü l-Aktāf (Shapur II, A.D. 309-79), but if the author of the Tabsrah is
correct in naming him Tahir ibn Mubammad (702), he would have been a Muslim end
(unless he was a convert adopting the patronymic ‘ibn Muhammad’—which is most
unlikely) the son of a Muslim, and could obviously not have been the grandson of
a man who died two and a half centuries before Islam.

In at-Tabari (‘of Tabaristán', a Persian province south of the Caspian) we have
to do with Ahmad ibn “Abd Allah Muhibb ad-Din at-Tabari (d. 1295?) who was the
author of The Clear -. Book on Archery (Kitab al-wādik fi r-ramy, etc.) of which
there are several extant manuscripts (Cf. Hein, ibid., p. 300; Ritter, ibid.,
136, 141). He has no connexion whatever with the great historian and scholar Abū
Ja'far Muhammad ibn Jarir at-Tabari (A.D. 839-923) as certain Muslim authors
seem to think (e.g. Musraf3 Kani in Hein, ibid., p. 299). From his own testimony
we learn that he was trained in the teaching of Abū Hashim by Muhammad ibn ‘Isa
s-Samar- qandi, in that of Tahir al-Balkhi by ‘Abd ar-Rahman al-Farawi (‘of
Fariwah’, now Kızıl Arvat, Turkmenistan), and in that of Ishaq ar-Raffa’ by Abū
Sa‘id al-Khwarizmi (‘of Khwarizm’, now Khiva, Uzbekistan) (Wadih, 57b ff., Ist.,
43b fE).

391
2. The Fundamentals of Archery


Taybugha's statement that there were differences of opinion regarding the number
of funda- mentals is amply borne out by what we have learned of the subject from
several other Islamic manuals, In general the authors of these works go into
much greater detail than does Taybugha and deal not only with the ‘roots’, or
fundamentals, but also with the ‘branches’ (furi), or secondary bases, of
archery (e.g. Hein, ibid., pp. 330-31 and Arab Archery, p. 17). An enumera- tion
and discussion of conflicting views on the number and nature of these ‘roots and
branches’ are beyond the scope of the present work. Nevertheless, we feel
obliged to comment, firstly, that the fundamentals attributed by Taybughà to Abū
Hashim and Tahir (see also Hein, ibid., p. 330) do not wholly agree with those
ascribed to them, for instance, by at- Tabari and the author of Arab Archery
(whose information may well have been derived from the Wadih) and, secondly,
that our author makes no mention whatsoever of any views held on the subject by
Ishaq. Table 1 below will enable the reader to see in what details at-Tabari
differs from Taybughà as regards Abi Hashim and Tahir (Wadik, 232-2442, Ist.,
17a-18a. Cf. Arab Archery, pp. 16-17).

392
: TABLE 1 .- Tabari Taybughà I. Abi Hashim

I. Grasp (gabdah) Grasping (gab¢) Feb rice Ext Ln

393. Aiming (rimad) rawing (madd) 4. Loosing (flat) Releasing (itlag)

2. Tahir

3941. Nocking (tafsitg) Grasping 2. Clench Locking 3. Grasp Ss 4. Aiming Releasing
5. Loosing |. Sighting (nazar)


N.B. As Taybughi's technical vocabulary differs from that of at-Tabari, an
attempt has been made in the table to carry over the differences into the
English rendering, although in practice there i$ no difference between aiming
and sighting (¢‘timdad, nagar), loosing and releasing (i/iat, itg), and
so-on. In Arab Archery, p. 49, the qaflah—translated by Faris and Elmer as
‘clench’

395
ON THE FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHERY 41


and for that reason retained by us—is defined as the folding of the little
finger, the ring-finger, and the middie finger tightly into the palm of the
right hand, We see no reason to accept such a definition and for linguistic and
technical reasons take the view that in most contexts it is synonymous with the
term ‘agd, thereby concurring with the opinion implied in Faris and Elmer’s note
in Arab Archery, p. 16, n. 13 (below, p. 54).

396In Table 2 are listed the fundamentals ascribed to Ishaq by at-Tabari (cf. also
Hein, ibid., p. 331): |

TABLE 2 TE

397. Standing to the mark (al-intisdb ilā I-'alamah) so that it is in line with the
left eye.  . Bracing (£r), or stringing. (On the technical difference between
the two terms, which we, like Fatis and Elmer, treat as synonymous, see Arab
Archery, p. 162.)  Nocking.  Clench.  Grasp.


tob

398
Aiming.  . Drawing on to the mouth (al-jarr ‘ald I-fam).  . Halting of the
arrowhead between the knuckles (or, perhaps, ‘phalanges’) of the thumb.


POW AAEY

399
Loosing.  Io. Letting the left hand go forward {al-fathah bi-sh-shamal).


This last is clearly a form of follow-through in which the left hand is allowed
to move away from the body towards the target at the instant of loosing, but
without any rotary movement of the bow as recommended by Taybugha (below,
Ch. 14). Faris and Elmer would appear to have been confronted with the same
expression and to have misunderstood its meaning, for they speak of ‘opening the
hand’ (Arab Archery, p. 17. Cf. also Hein, loc. cit.) The sense is made
perfectly clear in the Wagih (but not Ist. MS) 24a by the gloss wa-hiya t-tazla
‘that is to say, slipping’, where zaz/i; would appear to be a technical synonym
with the meaning ‘slipping the hand, causing, or allowing, it to go forward with
a smooth, sliding movement’. This interpretation makes excellent technical
sense, for there can be no sound loosing without some stable forward movement of
the bow-hand. (Cf. Fig. 46). i

400
po sim


CHAPTER 8 ON GRASPING THE BOW (QABD)

401
Grasping is the act of placing the side of the marn (below and p. 45) of the
bow’s grip in the crease which lies between the palm of the hand and the fingers
(i.e. the proximal, sometimes called by the author the first crease). This
action is discussed first not only because it is the first of the fundamentals,
but also because the first thing that a man does to a bow is to apply his grasp
to it.  The matn is the middle of the back of the bow’s grip.

Now, if the bow’s grip is placed in a man’s grasp after the manner prescribed,
the spine of the matn (lit. ‘the middle of the matn’s back’; below, p. 45)
should lie in the centre of the proximal phalanges of the fingers. This is
Tahir’s method (see, however, p. 130). It is the best and most practical of all
the grasps and the least likely to occasion mishaps. To elaborate: if you wish
to grasp the bow for the purpose of shooting, then, with your hand open, first
place the side of the

402
: vo DISTAL CREASE DISTAL PHALANX «———— Á i ("last crease’) MIDDLE PHALANX
MIDDLE CREASE E : | (‘second crease’) PROXIMAL PHALANX -£ f 7 -] 4*9


DISTAL PHALANX oy E a of ] free.

403
AP N ! N METACARPO- CUM. AUS SN LJ PHALANGEAL CREASE : \ a * (‘proximal crease")
[THENAR EMINENCE} CRX 9 x (0 (first crease") "WE or x = HEEL OF THE HAND yg — -]
= 2 m s MTS [HYPOTHENAR EMINENCE] EE ors BYE ZIND (see glossary) | der AL £d)


FtG. 18. PARTS OF THE HÀND

404
42


ON GRASPING THE BOW 43

405
matn of the bow's grip in the crease between the palm and the fingers. In the
case of a big palm with long fingers, the spine of the matn must then be placed
centrally in the middle crease formed by the fingers (ie. the proximal
ingerphalangeal crease, sometimes called in Arabic the second

crease). A man with short fingers, on the other hand, should put the ‘spine of
the! marn in the first crease, which is the one lying between the base of the
fingers and the palm. Finally, a man with medium-sized fingers should place the
spine of the marn! of his grip in the centre of the proximal phalanges
(Fig. 19). I believe this to be a basic operation that is second to none. If
your fingers are too long for the grip, you will find it a great advantage to
make it thicker by affixing a piece of leather.*

406



407Square Intermediate Oblique Fic. 19. GRASPS ON THE Bow (2). Long
fingers. (b). Medium fingers. (c) Short fingers.


Once the grip has been placed in the appropriate hand with fingers outspread,
the bow should be grasped with the little finger followed by the second
finger. In sequence, the little finger should be applied first, then the second,
or ring-, finger and finally the third, or middle, finger.  The pressure applied
to the grip should grow very much like a building, and just as the archer should
grasp first with the little finger and then with the second, so also, if he is
to use his fingers (qubbád) properly, he should begin by exerting the greatest
pressure with the little finger, followed next by the ring-finger until finally
the pressure reaches its lowest in the middle finger.  . You may then also say
that under these conditions the pressure on the grip will give a hold as

408strong as a building, so that the bow will neither deviate nor turn in the
hand. The pressure exerted by the grasp should be at its peak the very moment
the arrow is loosed.

Once you have a tight hold on the grip with the said three fingers, gently curl
over the end of the index finger without tensing it in any way. Fasten it only
loosely on the grip, for if you tense the index finger, the other three fingers
already tensed will for that very reason relax, and you will accordingly impair
your grasp. The rule for the index finger is that it should not be wrapped
around the grip. Only the end of it should be bent over the margin of the matn,
and that is all.*

409Having bent over the end of the index finger, place your thumb upon it in
contact with the

grip of your bow. Your thumb must Le as still as a corpse without even the
slightest movement.  It should not be pressed into the grip because it forms the
guide for the arrow, and if it is tensed the arrow will blister it. Tensing of
the thumb will also slacken the grasp.

410The grasp just described is the best, the most practical, and the safest of all
the various possi- bilities. It was Tahir al-Balkhi’s choice ‘and is known as
the grasp of *99'!.*

- Should you wish to use a different grasp from the one I have just mentioned,
grasp as before with the three appropriate fingers, but place the end of the
thumb over the back of the middle

411
44 SARACEN ARCHERY


finger. This will give you a different kind of grasp from the first—and a highly
important grasp at that, When using it, always tuck in the index finger behind
the matn so that when the maximum draught (al-wafa’ at-tàmm) has been attained
at full draw (below, p. 56), the finger will not lie in front of the arrowhead,
which may subsequently split and injure it. This grasp is extremely useful, and
will give a highly effective shot, as well as a good distance in flight
shooting. It will enable the archer to draw a longer arrow than is possible with
any other kind of grasp "because the base of the thumb can then spread out,
thereby allowing the arrowhead to be brought in behind the grip as far as the
skill of the archer permits—a considerable advantage in flight shooting
involving the use of a single bow and arrow. Furthermore, the archer's draw on -
the bow will be much stronger than any other. The Turks call this particular
grasp the changal-i báz (Pers. ‘falcon’s talons’). It is the flight shooter's
grasp because he can use it to get an extra length of draw on the arrow and
bring in the arrowhead right up to the very base of the thumb so that it
(Lc. the head) leaves the grip of his bow. This draught has neither superior nor
equal because the archer can bring the arrowhead in upon himself (inside the
grip).*

412
Fic. 20. THE ‘FALCON’s TALONS’


There are some archers who run the shaft over the ‘proximal’ phalanx of the
thumb. This is a perfectly good technique, Others run it over the index finger
and slant the thumb towards the arrow. Others there are who set up the thumb and
place the index finger beneath it so that they then look as though they are
reckoning thirteen (on finger-reckoning, below, p. 167). The arrow in this case
passes over the top of the thumb-nail. There are yet others who run the arrow
over the ends of the index finger and the thumb and look as though they are
reckoning thirty.  The first two techniques, however, are to be commended
above. all the rest. Those who use the second of these, incidentally, will run
the arrow through the middle of the groove formed between the thumb and the
index finger. No fault ever results from it.

413Do take care lest the ends of the fingers touch the heel of the hand when
grasping. I give this gtave warning to anyone who would touch the heel of the
hand with the ends of his fingers 'while grasping!, as will indeed be the case
if the grip of his bow is too thin or his fingers too long. The point has
already been adequately explained. dh. j


ON GRASPING THE BOW 45

414
COMMENT I. The Matn


From our author's definition of the term matn as the ‘middle of the back of the
grip’ (wast zahr al-gabdah) it is not immediately clear what meaning the term
‘middle’ is intended to convey.  When he goes on to speak of the ‘middie of the
back of the mam’ we are confronted with the bewildering problem of determining
what is meant by ‘the middle of the back of “the middle of the back” of the
grip’. One’s first reaction is to suspect a pleonasm. Careful reading of the
text, however, shows that this is not the case. It will be seen that the mam has
a side (jab) and a back (zahr) and that if the archer places the side of the
matn in the proximal crease, ‘the middle of the matn’s back’ will lie in the
centre of the proximal phalanges of his fingers. From this it is evident that
the ‘middle of the matn’s back’ is the mid-line longitudinally dividing the
dorsal surface of the grip. The matn’s ‘back’ is, as it were, its backbone, or
spine, and might be taken as a strip about $ in. wide running down the centre of
the handle.

415It remains only to determine what is intended by ‘the middle of the back of the
grip’ as a definition of matn. If it is meaningful, it can only be interpreted
as that section of the dorsal surface of the handle which the archer actually
grasps when shooting. This interpretation is borne out by the fact that in MSS
of the C group (a) the term matr is replaced by the expression ‘back of the
grip’ (zahr al-gabdak), which we are then told is ‘that part (sc. of the
dorsalsur face of the grip) which is in contact with the fingers when the bow is
drawn’ (C', 36b; C?, 6ob; C*, 29a), and is defined as such (C!, 38b; C*, 63b;
C*, 318), and (b) the archer is given the follow- ing advice: ‘Try to apply your
grasp to the middle of the grip so that the space remaining at the top of the
grip should be the same as at the bottom. If a fingers width is left both at the
top and the bottom, it is as required. 'To have more or less is incorrect,
although no harm will be done if the upper space by which the arrow passes is
just a little bigger than it should be’ (C1, 37b; C?, 62a; C?, 30a). For our
author, therefore, matn—in the present context at least—means the centre, or
middle, section of the grip's dorsal surface, i.e. the section lying between
each end of that surface of the grip. This interpretation is wholly consistent
with the meaning of matn as (a) ‘back’, i.c. the part of the body extending from
the neck to the end of the backbone and therefore excluding the extremities
between which it lies, and (b) ‘main part’ of a thing.

To sum up, the matr is the ‘body’ or ‘centre section’ of the handle above and
below which lie its extremities, while the ‘middle of the back of the main’ is
the ‘mid-line’, ‘spine’, or ‘backbone’ that runs down it. The body of the grip
of Middie Eastern composite bows is almost invariably raised into a conspicuous
ridge, or hump, on the dorsal surface (Fig. 6). This was formed by the
application of layers of sinew over a shaped wooden base and it is perhaps not
without significance that matn may also denote in Arabic a raised, hard ridge.

416It cannot be overemphasized that both mam and gakr al-gabdah are frequently used
quite loosely and that the meaning can only be exactly determined by
context. Later in the work our author uses matn without any qualifications to
mean ‘mid-line of that part of the dorsal surface which is held when
shooting’. i


B. x 2. Grasping the Bow

417The choice of grasp to suit any particular archer mainly depends on the length
of his fingers.  A variety of different grasps could be enumerated to confirm
the pronouncement: ‘Expert archers have disagreed on the exact manner of holding
the grip’ (Arab Archery, p. 46). At the same time a good deal of conflicting
evidence could be presented from medieval Islamic sources, but to little
purpose. We therefore confine ourselves merely to directing attention to three
basic grasps later discussed by Taybugha (Ch. 22, pp. 122): — |

(a) The square grasp (al-gabdah al-murabba'ah). Attributed to Abū Hashim. See,
however, D!, 26a; D*, 55a: “This is the method of Ishaq ar-Raffa’ and the reason
for it is that if one's

418
' OXEREAARMAALAN (S SAL AR AN L


fingers are long (sc. like Isháq's), they will turn on the grip.’ (Cf. C!, 36b;
C*, 60b-612; C?, 29a.)

419(b) The oblique grasp (al-qabdah al-muharrafah). Attributed to Tahir. “This is
Tahir’s method ... Which is suitable for persons with a small palm and short
fingers... A man with short fingers should put the back of the handle in the
first crease between palm and fingers to give him control over his grip-fingers
(gubbäd).’ (D!, loc cit.; D*, loc. cit.)

(c) The intermediate grasp. Attributed to Ishaq, but see D', 26a, and D*, 55a,
according to which it was the teaching of Abū Hashim, Bahram Gir, and
at-Tabari. (Cf. C', 36b; C*, 60b; C?, 29a.) Almost all other authors consulted
by us, however, agree that Isháq's grasp was intermediate. (Tabsirah, 48b; Arab
Archery, p. 47, etc.)

420It should be noted that the grasp attributed to ‘Tahir in the second paragraph
of the chapter (p. 42) is at variance with what our author has to say
later. Irrespective of the assertions of other writers, we are justified in
supposing that cither Taybughà or some scribe hes made a slip; for he himself
tells us later not only that Tahir had short fingers, for which he recommends,
even in the present chapter; that the marn be placed in the proximal crease, but
also that Tahir did in fact place the marn in that crease formed by the joints
of the little finger, ring-finger, and middle finger (below, p. 130).

A wide range of opinion on the manner in which the grip should be held and
conflicting views on the persons to whom particular grasps should be attributed
may be derived from a number of sources, notably Tabsirak, 47b-50a; Wadih,
30a-b, 372, 432-b, 47a ff.; Nihayah, Ch. vil, p. 64, etc. See also Arab Archery,
pp. 46-49. Hein, Isl., XV, p. 61, should be read with caution as corruption in
the text used as the basis for translation has passed unrecognized, and there is
also some misinterpretation.

421
3. The 'Falcon's Talons’


The name of this grasp is spelled and pointed in A! (41b, line 3) as
sinkilbaz. The expression is Persian as indicated in the text. It is
conceivable, but less likely, that we have to do with an arabicized form with
the same meaning, viz. chang al-baz. That our etymology and spelling are correct
is—in spite of the variety of forms in which the expression occurs in other
MSS—almost certain, for the manner of gripping described in our text strongly
resembles that of a falcon's talons, and in a society familiar with falconry
such a comparison would be undeniably meaningful.  Mustafa Kani compares the
configuration of the fist of the flight shooter to the shape of the head of a
harp (Hein Jsi., XV, pp. 62-63. Cf. Klopsteg, pp. 92-93), but since chang can
mean not only ‘harp’, but also ‘talons’, his statement is suspect, especially if
we take into account his need to explain that the harp is a ‘Frankish
(i.e. European) stringed instrument".

422The technique described, whereby the arrowhead is drawn inside the grip, is of
extraordinary interest. To do this, an archer must have considerable control,
for such a practice without the use of sóme shield such as the Turkish siper
(Hein, ibid., pp. 9-18; Klopsteg, pp. 59-67 and his figs. 28, 29, 305 Arab
Archery, pp. 174-5 and plate facing p. 40) is fraught with danger, and the
hazards of overdrawing an arrow have already been mentioned (p. 33). The
technique is a strictly flight-shooting device, but it must have been used, for
in D+, 27a, and D*, 56a, we en- counter the remarkable comment: ‘I have seen a
man at full draw who, by means of this grasp, - drew four finger-widths more
than his opponent. This was because he used a short arrow, yet attained maximum
draught at full draw (istatofa bi-l-wafã'. at-tamam).’.

As a flight-shooting device the technique would have obvious advantages if the
shot were Successfully accomplished, but it would be a rash man who would use it
in battle. It is the

423hazard which most likely ied to the development of the siper (Pers. 'shield")—a
shallow groove of horn, ivory or tortoise-shell, about 1 in. wide and 4
in. long, which was strapped to the wrist, enabling the point of the arrow to be
drawn several inches inside the bow. Two specimens of this shield are to be
found in the Manchester Museum (Ingo Simon Collection, Nos, 0.7739 and
O.7740). See Fig. 40.


CHAPTER 9 ON NOCKING (TAFWI!Q)

424
One way of taking up the arrow prior to nocking, which is the second
fundamental, is to take hold of it-—nock towards the elbow! *—with the palm and
‘all five! * fingers of the right hand as if you were taking hold of a
stave. This is a Turkish method of taking up an arrow (maskah Turkiyyah). An
accomplished archer will take hold of the shaft with the middle finger, thumb,
and index finger, and have the arrowhead in front of the ends of his
fingers. The arrow in this case is held at a point two-thirds Tof the distance
from the head!, the remaining third coming up towards the forearm through the
centre of the groove formed between the right index finger and thumb. "The
effect will be that of a scribe taking hold of a pen.!*

Of these two methods, the first is more convenient, reliable, and practical for
the archer, especially if the arrow is to be drawn from a quiver (Plate
16). Hold the arrow in position with the fingers of your left hand, In other
words, hold the shaft with the left thumb, index finger, and middle finger
against the grip of the bow. Some people call this the ‘clinging lock’ (‘agd
al-luzüm) of the left band on the arrow (Fig. 22 f).

425Take the nock of the arrow in the three appropriate fingers--the thumb, index
finger, and middle finger of the right hand—and, while nocking, keep your eyes
on your foe. Now nocking is the operation of fitting the arrow’s notch to the
string, this notch being termed the fug of the arrow or the Adz (see, however,
pp. 130, 138), which is a Turkish word (i.e. gez}. The operation should be
carried out in the following manner. "Once the arrow is held in place against
the grip’, you should run your fingers over the stele (badan as-sahm) to see
whether there is any break or fault in your shaft "such as splits or splinters
which may injure the left thumb!.* You continue to run your fingers along it in
this way until the nock of the arrow finds its way into the centre



426

FIG. 2r, NOCKING ; 2). Running the shaft forward against the string.  ). — b.

427
MA


48 SARACEN ARCHERY

428
of the middle phalanges of the middle finger and index finger and the proximal
margin of the distal phalanx of the thumb, Then, ‘with fingers pressing on the
nack,! you give ‘the end of the shaft! one shove with the right hand and bring
back the left "which is holding the bow! without allowing the string ‘against
which the arrow is running! to leave the stele until the string “comes in under
the thumb and'5 rides just clear of the nock (Fig. 21). You then move both hands
back (i.e. in the direction from which they came) and slip the string into the
nock, still keeping your eyes on your foc. In other words, at no time do you
look at the nocking operation, but rather keep your eyes fixed all the while on
the mark at which you are about to shoot, that is to say, the: enemy's
position. (It cannot be overemphasized that! your sight must be trained
constantly upon this mark without leaving it even for a single instant, for if
an archer takes his attention away from his foe, the Jatter will do him some
injury and perhaps even kill him. All archers must put in a good deal of
practice until their eyes get accustomed to being used in this way and the
operation becomes a natural function." ; The business of nocking that has just
been described should be executed with rapidity, which can only be acquired by
repeating the operation time after time. Only constant practice will bring the
experience required by the technique, for to nock speedily without looking at
the operation is difficult and can only be achieved by repeated practice and
constant training.


COMMENT

429
Nocking is treated, to a greater or lesser extent, by different authors in
different ways. Here is not the place to assemble all the material we have
discovered on the subject and to enter into a comparative study. One or two
points, however, do call for some comment, and for this purpose Arab Archery may
be used to most advantage, It should be noted that, in order to avoid vexatious
repetition of references, it is to pp. 40-42 of this work that we refer,


1. Taking Hold of the Arrow

430
(a) The ‘Turkish’ method. (Cf. Wadih, 42a; Hein, Isl, XV, p. 76; Klopsteg,
p. 96.) This is identical with that said in Arab Archery to have been advocated
by the school of Tahir al-Balkhi.  It was ‘easier than other methods and a
speedier way of drawing an arrow from the quiver when in hot pursuit of game or
an adversary’ (C1, 39b-40a; C2, 65b-66a; C*, 32a). Hence its appeal to Taybugh4,
the exponent of military techniques.

(b) The ‘pen’ method. (Cf. Wadih, loc. cit.) This is identical with that said in
Arab Archery to have been advocated by the school of Abii Hashim. Taybugha omits
to indicate that the little finger and ring-finger were folded into the palm. .

431‘There is no mention in our treatise of the method said in Arad Archery to have
been preferred by the school of Ishaq (cf. Wadih, loc. cit.). This consisted in
picking up the arrow with the index finger and the middle finger at one span’s
distance away from the arrowhead just as a bird would pick up a piece of straw
in its beak. It is ignored by our author presumably because it had no place in
combat. : ;


2. Supporting the Arrow at the Grip

432
On this point the author of Arab Archery is more informative than Taybughā and
offers two basic methods. The archer could either (a) place the arrow at one
fist’s distance from its head between the left thumb, index finger, and middle
finger which had already been released from the grip for that purpose, or (b)
keep the said three fingers closed on the grip until the right and left hands
came together, at which moment he would open them (ie. the left fingers) and put
a.


ON NOCKING 49

433
*38’ lock on the arrow at one span from the head while running his right hand
over the remainder of the stele as far as the nock to detect any faults there
might be in his shaft. This second method is said to have been that of Tahir’s
school. From careful reading of the text it would seem to have differed from the
first only in two points, viz. the manner in which the fingers took the arrow,
and the distance at which the stele was held from the head. In MSS of the C
group mention is made only of the left index finger and thumb in this connexion
(C1, 40a; C4, 66a; C}, 32b).


3. The Position of the Nock against the Fingers

434
According to Arab Archery, the nock prior to insertion of the string into the
notch should rest against the fingers in one of three positions, which differ
fractionally from those given by Taybugha. They are, however, worth mentioning
if only to illustrate the wide divergence of opinion on the subject. After
running his hand down the stele the archer could hold the nock (a) between the
index finger and the thumb with the notch against the distal phalanx of the
middle finger (Abi Hashim), or (b) with the middle phalanx of the index finger,
the fore part of the thumb, and the tip of the middle finger (Tahir), or (c)
between the index finger and thumb with the notch between the first two
phalanges of the middle finger (Ishàq). E


a 4. Insertion of the String

435
Two basic methods are advocated in Arab Archery, When the stele is against the
string the archer may (a) quickly and forcefully push the arrow forward and
bring the nock back on to the string (Abü Hashim), or (b) push forward without
clearing the string and then open the fingers to nock as soon as string and nock
make contact (Tahir, Ishaq). >


5. The Nocking-point This is the part of the bowstring to which the nock of the
arrow is set. Since it tends to be taken for granted by many Islamic authors it
is worth while to note the following remarks (D!, 28b;

436
D3, 57a-b).


‘The nocking-point (snazodi* at-tafwig) on the string should be directly in line
with the arrow- pass (majrd s-sahm min gabdat al-gaws), being a little higher if
the mark is at close range and a little lower for shooting at long range. If one
nocks low, the arrow will fly beyond the target, which is a desirable thing in
flight shooting or when shooting at a man in armour. so that the arrow may fly
upwards and slip in between the laminae . . .'

437
The-observation is interesting, but it contains some false reasoning inasmuch as
low nocking . confers no advantage of any kind. It leads to unsteady and even,
possibly, uncontrolled flight, Today's English teaching is that the
nocking-point should be $ in. above the point that is directly opposite the
arrow-pass and it must never be below (e.g. F. Bilson, Bowmanship, London, 1965,
P. 69).

All existing silk —a from the Middle East that have been so far examined are
bound with thread at the centre to prevent chafe on the string from the thumb
and the nock of the _ arrow. In an old string the nocking-point is also a common
breaking-point, hence the need for added protection there. In some cases extra
binding is found immediately above the nocking- point, and the extra thickness
provides a means of accurately locating the nock. The arrow can then be nocked
just below the binding and slipped up the string until it is stopped by this
thickened portion. This ensures that the arrow is nocked at the same place each
time, As none of the strings examined go back more than about two centuries and
since we have found no earlier

438
50 SARACEN ARCHERY


evidence of any kind to indicate that the nocking-point was in any way marked,
it may well be that this practice was a later innovation.

439To nock quickly without looking is a very difficult operation. Nevertheless, we
have no reason to doubt that proficiency could be achieved after many hours of
practice.


CHAPTER ro

440



441. ON LOCKING AND COUNTING ('AQD)


. "The act of locking the fingers on the bowstring and about the arrow's nock is
termed ‘agd, which also denotes the act of reckoning by the use of different
finger positions! (Appendix 4).  The method "which I recommend! consists in
locking your fingers in the position in which they would be for the purpose of
representing sixty-nine. Some allege that my lock of ‘69’ is that of ‘63°, but
in fact you conceal the finger-nails, and when you do that, you reckon nine,
‘not three!.  We have gone into this point with those who are conversant with
finger-reckoning and found it to be a fact. Those who use the system differ
about the manner jn which three should be reckoned, but as regards nine there is
no disagreement.!

442What you doto obtain the lock of ‘69’ is to gather the little finger, the
ring-finger, and the middle finger of the drawing hand! into the centre of the
palm and then to conceal the finger-nails.  This gives you nine. You next place
the tip of the thumb in the centre of the middle phalanx of the middle finger
and wrap the end of the index finger over the base of the thumb-nail. You will
then have reckoned sixty-nine. This is the right and proper lock which ‘all
good! archers use. 1

When drawing the bow, lodge the string in the crease of the thumb, or, to be
more precise, in the proximal margin of the joint between the two phalanges of
the thumb. By so doing you will provide the string with a rest (magarr) from
which it will not slip when the bow is drawn. This rest is the place in which
the string? should always be lodged, for it is the right and proper place
(Le. if a bare thumb or simple leather guard is used, for with a ring the string
is positioned above the joint). If the little finger, ring-finger, and middle
finger are strongly pressed home, an extremely firm lock will follow, Such
treatment is essential because it is upon the pressure of these three fingers
‘with concealment of the nails’ that a good strong lock depends.

443After pressing home the said three fingers, put the tip of the thumb on the
centre of the middle phalanx of the middle finger and keep it there the whole of
the time from the very moment you loose. Next, cover the base of the thumb-nail
with the middle phalanx of the right index finget, the base of the thumb-nail
being the point from which it commences growth, or the end opposite to that
which is cut when it is too long. What you do is to place the middle phalanx of
the right index finger on the junction of the nail and flesh "of the thumb!. See
that some of the thumb-nail remains visible—don't conceal it completely. An
archer, incidentally, when paring his nails, should take care not to be too hard
on his thumb-nail* "because it protects the flesh at the end!.5 It is, in fact,
better to leave the nail alone in times of war or when there is a lot of
shooting to be done. i

The real art of locking lies in pressing the end of the right index finger on
the thumb without too much bending, for if the right index finger bends and
curls around the thumb, the finger will not respond as it should upon
release. With archers this is a common fault, the term for which is kuzzaz
(i.e. ‘spasm’, which, strictly speaking, is the result of a fault rather than
the fault itself). It will result in the string’s rapping the end of the right
index finger because it is bent

444
51


52 | . SARACEN ARCHERY

445



446


S

447
c. 69 (oblique) d. 63



448

e.lockofBahràm — — f. 22

449



450Fic. 22. LOCKING AND COUNTING


ON LOCKING AND COUNTING $3

451
» too far around the thumb. It is, then, not only a fault, but also a cause of
injury, so do beware of it.

You may also use the pillion lock ('agd ar-radif) which is well suited to bows
that are strong, stiff, and powerful, but it gives a slow release. What you do
in this case is to lock as already indicated above, but then to mount the middle
finger on the right index finger and place it on the thumb beside the index
finger.

452You may also use the lock of ‘63’, which is the same as that of ‘69’, except
that the nails are visible in this case, but are concealed in the other. Then
again, there is the lock of *73' and that of ‘22’. The latter is called the
‘clinging’ lock and applies to the left hand when holding the arrow in place
along with the grip of the bow during the nocking operation (Fig. 22f).

There is also the Slav ('agd ag-Sagálibah) lock in which the archer puts his
three middle fingers on the string and extends the index finger along the shaft
of the arrow.’ The thumb has no place? in this lock, for which they make finger
guards of gold, silver, iron, and copper (Plate 9).  With this lock the bow is
held in the vertical position (toagifaA).

453Finally, you have the ancient Arab lock of pre-Islamic times." With this you
draw with the four fingers minus the thumb. Some would draw in this manner
holding the bow in a horizontal position (rdgidak), The arrow was placed between
the middle finger and the ring- and they would draw to the breast.

‘Apart from the ‘69’, the ‘pillion’, and the ‘63’, none of these locks is of any
advantage, but it may happen that they could be required for some contingency or
special purpose—for which

454
reason they are mentioned here.



455

Fic. 23. SASANID Lock

456
From a silver plate, item No. 7700, Archaeological Muscum, Teheran, This—and
similar cvidence—suggests that the locks supposedly used by Bahrüm and Chosroes
were not as stated.


A straight lock (al-istima’) will give a steadier draw, and an oblique
(at-tahrif) a speedier . dispatch to your arrow (Le. result in a faster loose,
which will add a little velocity to the arrow;

457it is achieved by the greater speed at which the thumb will disengage from the
string). Some archers place the string a little in front of the crease of the
thumb-joint in the direction of the tip.  This is a good technique giving a fast
loose (sarf al-ifidr) and good cast (sdrid li-s-sahm).

The main principle behind these observations is that for every type of finger
there is a particular Jock, just as for every type of palm there is a particular
grasp. The lock of Bahram (a/-‘agd al-Bahrami), for example, involves
lengthening the short, that is, the thumb, and shortening the long, that is, the
right index finger.?° Chosroes’ lock (al-‘agd al-KhusrawGni) is the reverse of
that of Bahram—it involves lengthening the long and shortening the short." The
lock may be varied, - then, to suit the individual, but! the nock of the arrow
may not be shortened 'to suit the lock!.  It is a great fault, so beware. (His
meaning is: if as a result of the kind of lock which you adopt, you find the end
of the nock pressing against any part of your thumb or index finger, you must
not shorten the nock to remove this pressure, You must either take a different
lock or accept the

458
pressure.)


54 SARACEN ARCHERY COMMENT 1, The Lock: Terminology

459
(a) Arabic. As indicated in the introduction, the string of the Asiatic
composite bow was drawn and held by the thumb, which in turn was held by the
index finger to give what is known as a ‘thumb-lock’, After careful
consideration of such evidence as has been available to us— much of it in
manuscript—we have come to the conclusion that, whatever extension of meaning it
may later have had (e.g. Arab Archery, p. 49), the verb gafala, ‘to make secure,
close, lock’ (noun, gaflak), which some authors use in connexion with the
thumb-lock, originally expressed only the basic action of confining the string
with the thumb and index finger. Ic is difficult to see how it could possibly
have been used to indicate the relative positions of the index finger and thumb,
to say nothi of the three remaining fingers. This being the case, it is our
suggestion that the need to describe the various positions in which the fingers,
taken as a whole, could be arranged in order to achieve the thumb-lock imposed
the necessity of introducing the verb ‘agada (noun: 'agd, plural, *ugüd) into
the archer's vocabulary. The word had the twofold advantage of meaning not only
‘to fasten’, but also ‘to reckon with the fingers’ according to a highly
developed and precise system whereby configurations of the fingers of a single
hand were employed to convey numerical values (Appendix 4). It could, therefore,
be used in conjunction with numerals to communicate exact information about the
configuration to be assumed by the fingers when putting a lock on a
bowstring. In most contexts, however, gaflak—never used by Taybughà—is
synonymous with ‘agd, and qofala, like 'agada, functions with numerals to convey
precisely the same information. i

(b) English. Ever since Morse (see Bibliography) described the various methods
of drawing a bowstring as ‘releases’ many English and American authors have
applied the term ‘release’ or ‘loose’ to what is in fact a ‘Jock’ (hence ‘Fisher
loose’, ‘Mediterranean loose’, ‘Flemish loose’, etc.). As the same word is also
used in archery to denote the release of the string, it is obvious that ‘lock’
is a more precise and appropriate term so far as the act of holding it is
concerned.  Lest the layman be misled, Morse’s ‘Mongolian release’ is none other
than the thumb-lock.

460
2, The Locks of ‘63’ and ‘69’

Although Taybugha has obviously taken the trouble to verify the method of
communicating the values of sixty-three and sixty-nine these numbers are
transposed in MSS of the C group so that the lock given in the foregoing chapter
as ‘69’ is described as “63° and vice versa. When transposed in this way, the
locks of ‘63’ and ‘69’ will be found to be identical with those given in Arab
Archery, p. 43, in which it will be observed that nine is reckoned with the
nails of the middle finger, ring-finger, and little finger exposed (p. 20) so
that the tips of the fingers rest on the palmar surface near the heel of the
hand instead of being pressed into the palm.

461There is no doubt that the lock in which the middle finger, ring-finger and
little finger are clenched into the palm so that the nails are concealed is the
strongest of all locks. We may conclude, therefore, that when the author of the
Nihayah (Ch. viii, p. 65) asserts that ‘63’ is the strongest, his view of the
manner in which it is reckoned is the same as that of the author of Arab
Archery, with whom Mustafa Kini is also in agreement. (Hein, Isl., XV, p. 65;
Klopsteg, P- 95.) Practical trials prove that '63' and ‘69 are the two most
effective locks, and, although there is evident disagreement about which is
Which, there is absolutely no doubt about the configurations with which we are
dealing.


5 AC 3. Other Locks According to the author of Arab Archery, the locks ‘agreed
upon by experts’ numbered six: the “63’, ‘69’, ‘73, ‘83’, ‘24’—called the
Khusruwént, or *Chosroes'" lock—and ‘72”.(p. 43).

462
ON LOCKING AND COUNTING 55


From the description that he gives of the last-mentioned Jock it cannot be that
of ‘72? (cf.  Arab Archery, p. 43, n. 20). It is, however, our ‘pillion’ lock,
or ‘agd ar-radif, otherwise termed ‘agd at-tardif (Tabsirak, 62b), and there can
be little doubt that Faris and Elmer's ‘reserve draw’ is a translation of ‘agd
ar-radif; for one meaning which radif certainly has, but which is in-
appropriate in the present context, is ‘reserve’. ‘The pillion lock admitted of
variations such as those described, for instance, in the Tabsirak (loc. cit.)
and the Nihayah (Ch. viii, p. 65), but it seems to have been regarded by most,
if not all, authorities as a lock which was awkward or gave . &slow loose, and
it is even asserted that it resulted in a loose that mainly launched flirting
arrows (stham mudtaribah) (D!, 30b; D4, 58a). It is of interest to note that it
was the lock used by Japanese archers.

463As regards the Chosroes’ lock, it should be noted that to reckon twenty-four
amounts to much the same thing as ‘lengthening the long and shortening the
short’. The view that it was ‘worthless except in drawing supple bows employed
in trick shots’ (Arab Archery, p. 43) is not shared by the author of the Nkd@yah
who maintains that it gave a most powerful loose and was extremely good for the
arrow (Ch. ix, p. 65). i

Among other locks of which we find mention are those of ‘20°, used edgewise for
shooting a number of arrows simultaneously (Arab Archery, p. 149), ‘23’ (D, 30b;
D*, 58a); ‘30° and ‘37° (Nihayah, Ch. viii, p. 65). Yet others could be
enumerated, but enough has been said to illustrate the interesting fact that the
number of variations of the thumb-lock used in the East was relatively large,
Small variations in forming the lock would be determined partly by personal
preference and partly by the relative lengths of the archer’s finger and thumb,
It is important that an archer, once having decided which lock is best suited to
his needs, should never vary the form as even the slightest alteration will
affect the direction of his shots.

464
4. The Position of the String


In discussing the position in which the string should rest against the thumb
Taybughd is assuming that the archer is not wearing a ring. There seem to have
been as many views on the position of the string in relation to the thumb as
there were opinions on how the bow should be grasped and the string locked. The
three positions indicated in our text seem to have been the most important,
though here again there is considerable disagreement from one writer to another
about the persons or schools to whom they should be attributed. We need only say
here that the author of Arab Archery ascribes the oblique position—said to have
been the oldest and that used by expert Persian archers—to Abii Hashim, the
straight position to Tahir, and the third position —said to give a quicker
release than the straight and a greater range than either of the other two— to
Ishaq (pp. 45-46). For different opinions on the subject, see in particular
Tabsirah, 592—642.

465Slow and quick releases are related to the speed at which the thumb disengages
from the string. A quick release such as can be achieved by the oblique lock
adds slightly more velocity to the arrow and can therefore have its
advantages. Our author's oblique lock is analogous to the Fisher loose intended
for use with the three-finger, or Mediterranean, loose ( Archery (Badminton),
P. 377). |

Archers will be well aware that to develop a clean and unvarying loose is one of
the most difficult facets of technique to achieve. - i |

466
CHAPTER rr ON DRAWING THE BOW (MADD AL-QAWS)


To draw, the points of grasp in each hand must be tensed, by which is meant, the
little finger, the ring-finger, end the middle finger of both hands. At the same
time both elbows must be tensed. In tensing the right elbow extra care must be
taken because it is of fundamental importance to the achievement of a good
draw.1*

467It is related that a woman once brought a boy of hers to the Imam ash-Shafi'i?
and asked him to teach him archery, to which he assented. ‘He must,’ she said,
“be strong in both fists, quick at both points, and free from both faults.’ She
turned on her heels, and the Imam ash-Shafi quickly rose to pay her respect and
asked her to which family she belonged. She told him that she was descended from
Sa'd ibn Abi Waqais.? ‘You speak the truth,’ he said, ‘This is indeed his
teaching.’

Authorities on archery are agreed that ‘strong in both fists’ refers to the
tensing of the three appropriate fingers of both hands, but they disagree on
what ‘both faults’ are. Some say that they arc rapping (targ) and ‘deflecting
the arrow by! slapping the arrow-pass (tadmik),* though other opinions have been
expressed in abundance, The truth of the matter is that the two faults are
pinching "the nock? (khang)* and rapping, for these are the worst faults in
archery (on faults and their consequences, sce below, Ch. 21. ‘Both points’ are
left unexplained, but they are, we suggest, the nocking-point and the
anchor-point (below, p. 126), the reference being to speed in nocking).

468When ready to draw the bow, tense your elbows and fists, then raise both hands
and elbows until they arc on a level with your shoulders, poised like the beam
of a balance.* Elbows, fists, and shoulders should be like a paper-rule, running
in one straight line so that no one part is higher or lower than another. At all
points the distance from this line to the ground should be the same.  "To repeat
and emphasize,’ the distance from this line to the ground should be one and the
same at all points. This rule is reiterated to impress upon the novice that we
have here a principle that is of fundamental importance to good shooting. All
ancient archers gave their pupils the same advice. ;

Correct use of the right elbow is the essence of a good draw, and maximum
draught is attained when the lobe of the ear is reached. Drawing to the lobe
will enable the archer to determine what the length of his arrow should be. What
he does is to put his back to a wall and bring the arrow to full draw (yastawft
s-sahm) so that both his elbows come in contact with the wall. The draught of
the arrow is then ascertained by noting that point on the shaft which is found
at full draw to lie between the phalanges of the left thumb, for the distance
between that point and the nock will be just the right length for his particular
arrow. No other measurement will meet his needs.  This question of finding the
length of one’s arrow has always been a problem to archers and a subject on
which they have different ideas." For its solution the best teaching ever
expounded is the one I have just described and, in reco ing it, I have explained
a method which men are loath to disclose and which is therefore left unmentioned
by others. !

469It is reported that at-Tabari said, *'Abd ar-Rahm4an al-Faráwi? told me that
there are ten


56

470
ON DRAWING THE BOW 57


points to effective shooting (mikayah), of which nine lie in the attainment of
maximum draught by a properly completed draw and only one in the archer’
(meaning, presumably, that a successful shot largely depends on the completion
of a faultless draw). The completed draw (wafd') is one of three kinds:* the
lesser (bid@yah), the standard (Aifayah), and the greater (mihayah) (below,

471
pp. 123, 127ff).  COMMENT


‘Drawynge well is the best parte of shootynge' (Ascham) -

472
1. The Essentials of the Draw


‘With the performance of the draw the archer, now done with the preliminaries,
enters upon that phase of his shooting which is directly concerned with his
shot. He should draw smoothly and easily with fairly equal distribution of
weight between both arms for ‘to drawe casely and vniformely, that is for to
saye not waggyng your hand, now vpwarde, now downewarde, but alwayes after one
fashion . . . is best both for profit & semelinesse’ (Ascham, p. 105). .

473Since the strength of the draw comes not from the arms, but from the muscles of
the back and shoulders, the archer must, if he is to achieve a powerful draw,
keep his right elbow in the same horizontal plane as his shoulder while
drawing. Once the bow is full-drawn, both arms should support and maintain equal
tension until the arrow is loosed. To draw correctly is of great im- portance,
for a bad draw will almost certainly culminate in a bad shot.


2. Methods of Drawing

474
There are three basic methods of drawing: (2) that whereby the archer with hands
relatively close together at waist height begins simultaneously to push against
the bow, pull on the string, and raise his hands; as the bow moves upwards he
gradually increases the distance between his hands V-wise until the bow is
full-drawn and the arrow horizontal; this technique is favoured by most modern
archers and, so far as can be judged from our text, was our author's method
also; (b) that whereby the archer raises his bow-arm almost fully extended
towards the aiming point with little disturbance of the string until that arm is
level, and then draws; (c) that whereby the archer raises both arms above the
horizontal and draws as he lowers his hands to the correct elevation. This last
method has always been favoured by the Japanese.


3. Creep !

475It is nowadays Western practice to complete the draw and then to hold for
several seconds during which final aim is taken. There is a great danger at this
stage that the arrow will ‘creep’, or nose forward, either because of a slight
bending of the bow-arm or an easing of the shoulders occasioned by muscle
strain. If the arrow does creep, it will not be full-drawn at the moment of —
loosing and will accordingly fall short of the mark. Ascham, doubtless alive to
this danger, advises that *Holdynge must not be longe . . . it must be so lytle
y* it maye be perceyued better in a mans mynde when it is done, than seene w' a
mans eyes when it is in doyng’ (p. 105).


CHAPTER 12

476
ON SIGHTING (NAZAR)


58

477
ON SIGHTING 59


Sight the target outside the bow from the back of the hand. What constitutes the
outside of the bow is a controversial point. Some say that to sight outside the
bow means setting your sight along the arrow and that to sight inside the bow is
to sight from the back of the hand because it lies between the bow and the
archer. The correct understanding of the term is as stated ‘in the opening
sentence of this paragraph! because the inside of the bow is the space between
the bow and its string. So, properly speaking, internal sighting will be that
which is carried out by means of the arrowhead (i.c. as seen between the bow and
the string), and to draw conclusions on the subject from a picture of Bahram Gir
‘as some who take the contrary view do! is of little use, because a picture on a
wall or in a book is not large enough to show such detail (on these forms of
sighting, see Fig. 24 and below, pp. 61-62).

478External sighting can be done in three ways. In one of these you look askance
with both eyes as described above, By a second variation the arrowhead lies
outside the bow in line with the mark, while the archer looks at the mark with
both eyes and aims with the left. He then rapidly . snatches the arrow (below,
p. 64) and releases. Thirdly, he can train the arrowhead on the mark outside the
bow. In this case he uses his left eye to aim and keeps his right on the dustár
of the bow without using it to sight any part of the mark, keeping the knuckles
of the left hand in line with the centre of the mark.

You can also sight by split vision. This is done by training the arrowhead on
the mark with the left eye outside the bow and coming into focus by directing
your right eye on to the mark from inside the bow. Never take your right eye off
the arrowhead or your left from the mark at which the arrow is to be loosed.

479You may adopt a variation of this method as follows.! First, you use both eyes
to train the arrow on the mark outside the bow. Then, when only one-third of the
arrow remains to be



480

l Fic. 24. AIMING i ; (2). Aiming ‘inside’ the bow. d (b). Aiming ‘outside’ the
bow.

481
60 SARACEN ARCHERY


drawn and the arrowhead disappears from sight "behind the bow,! you keep the
left eye trained on the mark and with the right watch inside the bow for the
arrowhead to come on to your hand.  When the arrowhead is as far back as it can
go at full draw, you release, This is an excellent method and is, furthermore,
the most accurate and the least confusing of all. Those who practise the
technique adopt a squatting position between the square and oblique postures,

482
iv

Some archers gauge elevation and direction (wazana) from the beginning of the
draw and make continual adjustments until the moment of release. What you do in
this case is to train the arrowhead on to the mark, gauge precisely, and draw,
training your sight along the left forearm with both elbows evenly and correctly
balanced. This is Tahir’s method. Alternatively, you can sight the mark first
and, when you have drawn half the arrow, gauge precisely and at that instant
bring the arrow to full draw and release, This is a more careful method. Others
only gauge at the end. In other words, elevation and direction are not precisely
gauged (Là yatahaggag al-wazn) ) at the beginning of the draw. On the contrary,
the archer waits and, when a fist’s length of the arrow remains to be drawn, he
holds for a moment, sights, and then, snatching rapidly, releases.  This is the
military technique, and it is of far greater value than any of those already
described,

483You may also gauge by taking the process right through from the moment you begin
to draw until full draw is reached, but then giving a quick release, This is an
excellent method for target shooting, but it is best to accustom oneself to
military techniques.


v

484
To hit an enemy at some distance away, aim at his head "by elevating the upper
limb of the bow, for an arrow loses height on its way to the mark, "If aimed in
this way, however,! it will find its way into your adversary and kill him. To
get your arrow into an enemy at close range, en the other hand, you should aim
for his leg "because in the first stage of its flight after leaving the bow an
arrow gains height. You can in this way make allowances for different distances
between the two extremes, Some archers say that if you cover your opponent with
your left fist and shoot, you will kill him, but this is only true if one is at
a certain specified distance. Archers hold different opinions about the angle of
ascent and velocity of an arrow. Judgement and Jength of experience, however,
are the only real means of obtaining the best results,

All that we have said so far depends for its success on a steady left hand, a
firm hold on the grip, correct locking, alignment of both arms, correct
sighting, presence of mind, a sound draw with the ‘right! elbow in the
appropriate position, a clean release with tension in both elbows and, above
all—for on this hi everything else—imperturbability.

485
COMMENT


It goes without saying that the ability to aim is essential to accurate
shooting. Although it becomes intuitive with ience, the art is not easily
acquired and is indeed unattainable until and unless the archer has complete
control of his bow, Methods of aiming in Islamic manuals are numerous to the
exhaustion of almost all possibilities, The individual, therefore, had to make
choice of method. ‘To some extent at least, his choice would appear to have been
dictated by the size and design of his bow; for the doctrine that all sighting
should be ‘external’ was, we are told, that of the users of the short
Khorasanian bow, while the view that it should be all ‘internal’ was held by
archers who used the ‘average longer bow’ (Tabsirak, 65a). The method selected

486
ON SIGHTING 61


would also depend to. some degree on factors such as style and kind of shooting
(target, hunting, war, etc.).

487It is more than likely that the range of methods known to Taybugh4 was far
greater than the foregoing chapter may suggest. If he appears sparing with his
knowledge, it is because of his concern with the needs of the warrior. Detetred,
we suspect, by his intensely practical mind from burdening his readers with
confusing prolixity, he restricts himself to what he personally regards as
essential information. It is our intention, in commenting on what he has to say,
to follow his example and to resist the temptation to assemble a wealth of
material which, however interesting it may be, would only bewilder the general
reader.


I. Monocular and Binocular Sighting

488
Modern teaching, like that of Taybughi, favours the use of both eyes in aiming,
but neverthe- less allows the closing of one if the archer finds the binocular
method too difficult.

To the hunter, binocular vision is very necessary for judging range, for if one
eye were to be closed throughout the draw, i itis probable that errors in
elevation would result. We can, therefore, safely assert that what is applicable
in the case,of the hunter in this respect would be equally applicable in the
case of the combatant archer.

489‘The 'askant', or ‘squinting’, method of binocular aiming of which Taybugha
thinks so highly is mentioned by the author of Arab Archery (p. §3) who does not
however share his enthusiasm for it: ‘This type of aiming ... by some is
supposed to be the best... In the opinion of the author, however, it is the
worst and most faulty and possesses the greatest margin of error; for if the
archer should close one eye and open the other and aim with it by sighting
obliquely, and then should close the eye which he had left open and open the one
which was closed and should aim with it, he would realize that the aim of the
two eyes in this position is never the same.  How, then, could aim taken by this
method be accurate?” Taybughà, however, to whom this method was obviously
suited, does not assert its universal value. In fact, he clearly confines it to
persons with ‘equality of vision in both eyes’.


2. Sighting from the Side of the Bow

490
Under fit esc ee GIGEOREOHUH. witha Se: Tarea eect OF eld ee piper aite enti
which is related to range.

In his explanation of what is meant by the ‘outside’ and the ‘inside’ of the bow
Taybughà agrees with the author of Arab Archery, who defines the latter as ‘the
side toward your right . .  : along which the arrow passes at the time of
release’, and the former as ‘the other side which is toward your left’ (p. 52).

491Given an arrow that is matched to the bow and its user and will therefore travel
in the direc- tion in which it is pointing the moment it is loosed, the line of
aim may vary laterally according to three basic techniques which call for some
explanation:


(a) External sighting (an-nazar al-khárij or min kharij al-qazos).

492When the arrow is drawn to the ear or thereabouts, its tail, or nock, is
displaced to dis tight of the line of sight as given by the right eye. This
displacement is roughly equal to the width of the bow (Fig. 25). This being so,
the left edge of the bow must, for an accurate shot, be seen in line with the
target. To aim in this way is, according'to our author's terminology, to aim
‘outside the bow’. (Fig. 24 b.)

This method admitted of variations, and the same three variations as are
mentioned by Taybugha are described in more or less detail in Arab Archery,
p. 53. There the author attributes Taybugha’s third variation—his own personal
preference and that in which the

493
62 SARACEN ARCHERY


archer keeps his right eye on the dustár and blind to the target—to Aba
Hashim. All three variations—‘in universal use among the kings of Persia’—are
declared suitable for archers using the oblique posture, whether seated,
standing, mounted, or in armour, and are pronounced ‘very effective because of
the length of the draw that is used in them’ (ibid., pp. 53-54). TTA | (b)
Internal sighting (an-nagar ad-dakhil, or min dakhil al-qaws). .  When the arrow
is drawn to the chin or between lip and chin its nock should Hie in the vertical
plane immediately beneath the right eye, and the line of sight thus run along
the line of the shaft. It follows that, in this case, it is the right edge of
the bow that must be aligned with the target. The archer will then be aiming
‘inside the bow’. (Fig. 242.)  Viewing the target according to this method is
treated in Arab Archery, p. 54, bat, to judge from the author’s comments, it had
obvious disadvantages as a military technique.  Hence, no doubt, the absence of
any mention of it by Taybugha.  (c) External-internal sighting (gismat
al-'aynayn, ‘division of the eyes’).  When the arrow is drawn to, or near, the
right-hand corner of the mouth (Le. to an intermediate position), aim must be
taken between the two last and is achieved by the use of both eyes. : Both forms
of the ‘split-vision’ technique mentioned in our text are dealt with by us
author of Arab Archery, pp. 54-55. Expressing himself more clearly and in
somewhat guises, teria ur OE ior s rie a ee grip on & level with his nose, align
the arrowhead with the target, and focus his sight on both with the left eye
from outside the bow and with the right from the inside. Drawing horizontally at
the level of his lips until all but a fist’s width remains, he should complete
his draw with a sudden jerk and release. The method is ascribed to Ishq. The
second technique, we are told, is said to be more accurate than any other, and
this is Taybughà's view, as we have scen,

494
Line of sight -


< E eem Bow — >

495
A point not to be overlooked is that if the left eye is the master eye and the
archer shoots right-handedly, the bow must be displaced weil to the right of the
target to compensate for the distance between the left eye and the nock of the
arrow. -

The Japanese draw roughly as far back as the point of the right shoulder and
consider that the ideal aim is achieved with the left edge of thé bow running
through the centre of the target. If this cannot be done, the bow may be
displaced either to the right co that the target may be viewed well to the left
of the bow, or to the left so that the target is obscured by the bow as viewed
by the right eye (Acker, Japanese Archery, pp. 65-67).

496
3. Gauging Elevation and Direction __ In Arab Archery, pp. 55-56, Taybugha’s
first two techniques are viewed as two variations of the ‘method used by archers
who faced the target directly.  His third technique, on the other hand, is given
as one of two variations of the method used by archers who faced the target
obliquely. It is recommended for warfare on the gtounds that the


ON SIGHTING 63

497
bow could be concealed from the enemy while most of the draw was being
made. When the arrowhead was a fist’s width away from full draw, it could be
turned on the enemy. The second variation—not mentioned by Taybughá—differed
only from the first in that atm was taken not only when the arrow had been drawn
to within a fist’s width from its head, but also at the very

of the draw. Taybughá does not appear, however, to have shared the view that it
was the ‘best method and . . . suitable for all purposes’.

498
CHAPTER 13 ON THE LOOSE (ITLÀQ)


The traditional teaching of authorities on shooting is that there are two forms
of loose whereby the arrow, after being brought to fuil draw, may be discharged
from the centre of the bow (kabid al-gaws). One of these is called mukAtalas or
‘snatched’. The term is derived from the verb skittalasa, which is used to
describe the action of a thief practising fraudulent sleight-of-hand ‘and is an
appropriate extension of the meaning’, for the movement in this kind of loose is
such as to be almost imperceptible. The second form is termed the sõkin Cheld';
lit, *motionless"), the implication being that the completed draw (al-madd
at-tatmám) is followed by a hold (lit. *steady pause"). There are said to be
"not merely two forms of loose, but! three: the snatched, the held, and the
twisted (mafritk),

499
snap of the fingers from the inside of the string. At the loose that part of the
arrow which remained at the hold should have been grabbed back, as it were, with
such rapidity as to be imperceptible to the bystanders, leaving them with the
impression that the archer failed to bring the whole of the arrow to full
draw. This is the finest and most practical loose for military purposes and when
competing for distance.

The second form of loose, namely the held, is executed in the following
manner. The full length of the arrow is drawn to its absolute limit, and, when
the hands are motionless—by which is meant completely and utterly immobile—the
arrow is released. In more precise terms, the archer should draw the arrow until
there is nothing left to draw and then, ‘before loosing,!  hold with firm
control For the count of one, two, or three, but no more. It is a good technique
to adopt for shooting at a mark or at = |

500It is related that al-F »* when bringing the arrow to the centre of the bow,‘
would say, ‘In the name of Godt end that whenever he loosed, he would say, “God
is greatest’. It is also related ‘that Idris ibn Yahya* said, "As-Saffáh" once
paid me a visit in the course of which he asked me whether I was an accurate
shor. I replied that sometimes I was and sometimes I wasn’t. Where- upon he told
me to say ‘upon drawing and releasing! “As God wills! There is no god but God,
and there is no power apart from God! He added that if I made these
pronouncements, ¥ would hit the mark and not miss, God willing. The archer
should bear all this in mind as it will be a great help. ; | : |

The archer should complete the operation by coolly and calmly forming a crescent
(muhallila") . With an upward twist ( farkah) of the wrist (frontispiece). More
explicitly, the position of his hand Immediately after release Should be such
that his right index finger and thumb lie hard by his - ear in the form of a
crescent, this being achieved by an upward fand outward! twist of the wrist |

501
64


ON THE LOOSE 65

502
‘that will reverse the position of the hand and thus leave the little finger
uppermost. This action should be part of the loose and there should be no lag
between the two!.? To accomplish the loose, the right index finger and then the
thumb should be opened in rapid sequence, As far as the twist is concerned, it
is essential that the movement should come from the wrist. One further point:
the archer will find it a great help, when loosing, to open his middle finger
along with his right index finger and thumb.

A number of advantages are to be gained from this technique: it will safeguard
the right index finger against raps from the string, afford protection against a
broken thumb-nail and bruising of the inside of the thumb, give a clean loose,
and do no damage to the surface of the (leather) thumb-guard.

503The loose should be accomplished with a backward punch (lakzah), or thrust, of
the right elbow as though the archer were jabbing someone behind with his
elbow. Some archers open out the forearm (frontispiece) as they loose.*°* The
first method, however, is safer and sounder, especially in combat and confined
spaces "because injury can be caused (presumably either to oneself or to a
fellow archer standing close by) if the forearm and fingers are opened out in a
confined space! 11 To close the fingers after the loose is a better and more
practical technique in battle, 1*


COMMENT

504
Although our author, in common with others who deal with the details of shooting
technique, breaks down its various aspects into constituents, it is important to
note that in practice the actions which go into the making of a shot are
essentially indivisible, for each action merges with the next to form a rhythmic
whole. On paper this fact is perhaps nowhere more strikingly illustrated than in
the foregoing chapter, in which the reader will have observed the extent to
which the loose involves the draw.


1. Essentials of the Loose

505
Mastery of the loose is ‘the consummation of shooting . . . and the life of the
whole art depends on it’ (Acker, Japanese Archery, p. 68). The hand must not go
forward with the string (sect. 4 below), and the loose must be clean and
unvarying, for if accuracy is to be achieved, the archer must know as exactly as
he can how the arrow will leave his bow. If the loose is not clean, deflection
can result. A clean loose is more easily achieved than a consistent
one. According to accepted classification, the loose can be either fast or slow,
but the type actually employed is of less con- sequence than consistency. A
fast, or sharp, loose will increase the velocity of an arrow and is therefore
preferable to a slow, or sluggish, loose, which, as might be conjectured, gives
a slower flight. It is easy to understand, therefore, how higher or lower
flight, as the case may be, will result from an inconsistent loose and how such
a fault can be responsible for wider variations in flight than any other single
factor.

Variations in the loose from the thumb-lock result from two main causes:
firstly, variations in the pressure of the thumb tip against the middle finger
and hence in the degree of tension in the muscles of the thumb, and secondly,
variations in the pressure of the index finger on the thumb-nail and the manner
in which it is released. | E

506
2. Disengagement of the Drawing Hand


With a thumb-lock, effective accomplishment of the type of loose with which we
are concerned depends on clean and rapid disengagement of the thumb from the
string. It will be noted that our author speaks not of a simultaneous
disengagement of thumb and index finger, but of a rapid sequence. This advice is
also that of Mustafa Kani who is, however, somewhat more

507
66 | SARACEN ARCHERY


explicit: *, , . the right index finger should be released, then the thumb. Both
movements, how- ever, should follow one upon the other so rapidly that an
onlooker cannot see, nor the shooter distinguish, the separate actions . . . If
the finger and thumb are opened simultaneously the string will emit an
“undesirable” twang, the thumb-nail and the end of the index finger will be
injured, and the flight affected" (Hein, Isl, XV, p- 71. Cf. Klopsteg,
p. roo). According to at-Tabari, it was the practice of Abü Hashim to open the
middle finger along with the thumb and index finger (Wadih, 31a).

508The farkah. One problem connected with the thumb-lock is that the string, when
loosed, is liable to catch the tip of the index finger. Although the blow may be
so slight as to inflict no injury, it will nevertheless cause some deflection of
the string as it travels forward and, cor- respondingly, some change, however
small, in the direction of the arrow as it leaves the bow.  By means of the
farkah, or ‘twist’, the index finger could be swept clear of the string. That
this was indeed its purpose is evident, for practical trials extending over a
number of years have shown the distinct merit of this technique. Both Abū Hashim
and Tàbir al-Balkhi are said by at- Tabari to have used the farkah when
loosing. Ishaq ar-Raffa', on the other hand, preferred a “straight” (smustatoi)
disengagement without any twist at all (Wadih, 44b).


3. Forms of Loose (a) In the preceding chapter.

509(i) The mukhtalas. From correct use of this method the archer would derive the
advantage of a somewhat faster loose than the sákin would permit. The consequent
increase in the velocity of his arrow would add to its range in flight shooting
and to its penetrative power as a missile in war. Exposure to the danger of
creeping would be minimal, but liability to errors and varia- tions of draught
would be an unavoidable hazard. Furthermore, because of the slight extra thrust
taken by the arrow, even the most fractional deviation from perfection in the
accomplish- ment of the loose would cause it to flirt. Hence its unsuitability
for target shooters and beginners (Ct, 502; C*, 81b; C4, Arb, etc.).

(ii) The sakin, Basically, this is the form of loose employed by the modern
target archer of the Western world. Although it gives a slightly slower release
than the mukAtalas, the hold at full draw, if properly executed, makes for a
consistent draught and enables the shooter to achieve greater stability and take
more careful aim, It therefore offers the advantages of ‘greater accuracy, and a
steadier flight’, and it is understandable why it should be advocated as ‘the
first method of release to be learned by 2 novice’ (C^, 50a; C*, 81b; C?, 42a,
etc.).

510(iii) The mafrük. The sense of Taybugha’s remark that there were said to be
three forms of loose, viz. the mukhtalas, the sákin and the mafrik, is not
entirely clear. The implication could be either that he had heard of, but was
not himself familiar with, or did not approve of, a loose termed mafrük, or that
that term was applicable not to a form of loose stricto sensu, but rather to an
extrinsic point of technique whereby a form of loose could, or should, be
accomplished. To us the second of these alternatives seems the more plausible
interpretation, for while it cannot be denied that instances of mafrük as a term
applicable to a fórm of loose in its own tight can be cited (below), there is
nothing whatever in our text to suggest otherwise than that Taybughà merely
regarded a M mafrük, or ‘twisted’, when accomplished with a farkah, or *twist',
in the sense already explained.

(b) In Arab Archery and Mustafa Kani’s Telbis.

511For reasons which will soon be apparent the observations of the authors of both
these treatises merit consideration (Arab Archery, pp. 58-59; Hein, Isl., XV,
pp. 70-723 Klopsteg, pp. 99-100).

By the author of Arab Archery the forms of loose are classified as mukhtalas,
mafrük, and mutamatH. Of these, the first-—rendered ‘sprung’ by Fatis
and. Elmer, a translation which we discard in favour of ‘snatched’—conforms more
or less to Taybugha’s definition. The second,

512
ON THE LOOSE 67


on the other hand, is described as follows: ‘The twisted loose consists in
drawing the arrow to its fall length, pausing for a count of two, giving the
arrow a twist with the right hand from the inside of the string [our italics],
and then releasing the index finger and thumb and relaxing the hands. The twist
( farkak) consists of pressing lightly upon the string with the base of the
index finger and turning the right hand a little until the space between the
thumb and index finger adheres to the side of the archer’s neck, and, as it
were, rubs against it.’ As it stands, this

513makes such little technical sense that it makes of mafrik a greater problem than
that which it might. have been expected to solve. The loose designated mutamatti
(Arab Archery: *outstretched") is executed in much the same way as Taybughi’s
sá&in except that there is rio pause at full draw, ;

Mustafa Kānřs vocabulary pertaining to the loose is substantially the same as
Taybugha’s, but the senses in which he uses identical or similar terms are
markedly different. That this should be the case is not so surprising as it may
seem at first sight if it be recalled that the two authors, the one writing in
Arabic in the fourteenth century and the other in Turkish in the nineteenth, are
separated by more than four and a half centuries. Over so long a period, which
saw the decline of the bow’s importance as a weapon of war, semantic changes
could well be expected to occur following the shift of emphasis from military to
sporting techniques, notably in the sphere of flight shooting so highly
developed by the Ottomans. At all events, for the Turk the ibhrilás, or
‘snatch’—a term substantially identical with our mukhtalas—significs ‘drawing
rapidly and loosing without a pause as soon as the right hand has reached the
ear” (Klopsteg, p. 99).  The accomplishment of a deliberate loose following a
slow and placid draw is termed sákin, while the mefrük (mafrük) amounts to much
the same sort of loose as Taybugh’’s mukhtalas.

514Enough has been said to illustrate the dangers of equating the meanings of
identical or similar technical terms occurring in the works of different authors
separated by time, distance, ot language, or all three. :


4. The ‘Backward Punch’

515
By following our author’s advice to accomplish the loose with a “backward punch’
of his nght elbow the archer will avoid not only any tendency to creep (above,
p. 57), but also the equally undesirable fault known as the ‘forward loose’, by
which is meant forward movement of the drawing hand at the instant of
loosing. The forward loose, like creep, with which it may be combined, will
result in Joss of range and is therefore a serious error. The ‘backward punch’
will ensure that the shooter’s drawing hand will come back off the bowstring
without his applying any forward movement to the arrow at the moment of
release. The action must, however, be carried out with meticulous care and
attention so that not even the slightest increase in draught results. To
increase the draught in this way is a fault known in Western terminology as
‘snatching’.


CHAPTER 14 ON THE FOLLOW-THROUGH (KHATRAH)

516
[The khatrah is a particular kind of follow-through for which there is no
satisfactory English equivalent, See Comment and Gloss, .]

To thrust the bow forward ‘with a downward push of the left handu immediately
after the Aree is an action which has won the esteem and authority of prominent
archers as a principle

517
If, on the other hand, the movement is accomplished when the arrow has already
left, it will not only, as before, confer no advantage, but it may also, should
it bring down the arm, be detrimental to the shooter, especially in combat, for
he may well catch the siyah against something and : break it. Alternatively, the
styah may strike him in the side and do him some injury. Add to which that,
should an archer use the whole atm from a squatting position, he will strike the
ground with the siyah and break it, while if he is mounted, he will strike his
charger ‘or his comrades around him, especially in a crowded field!.5 Altogether
it is a most dreadful fault, so beware of it.


COMMENT

518
What an archer does with his bow-hand immediately after the accomplishment of
the loose is an integral part of the act of shooting and as important as all his
previous actions, He must in


68

519
ON THE FOLLOW-THROUGH 69


fact follow through, otherwise consistent and accurate performance is
unattainable. At full draw a pressure of perhaps 60 Ib. or more is exerted by
the bow-hand and arm against the grip of the bow. When the string is loosed,
some movement must result from muscular reaction following the sudden removal of
pressure. In a correctly executed shot the bow-hand should move directly towards
the target. This forward movement is slight, but somewhat more complex than our
simplified explanation is apt to suggest (for a more detailed exposition of the
subject, see Archery : the Technical Side, pp. 141-46). In order to assure the
movement, many modern archers con- sciously thrust the bow-hand towards the
target and, keeping the hand at the end of the act in the same plane as before
it, hold the position for a second or two. This action constitutes the basic
follow-through, of which the main characteristic is that the hand remains in
line with the target until the arrow is well clear of the bow. Experience shows
that if an archer develops the habit of dropping his bow-arm as soon as he has
made his shot, he is liable to start letting it fall before the arrow has in
fact left the string. If he shoots in this way, the least that can happen to his
arrow is that it will fly low. i

520A brief reference has already been made to the forward movement of the bow-hand
(above, P- 41). Its importance was recognized by the authors of Arabic manuals,
but the fact is apt to escape the attention of the layman since the subject is
not treated under a separate head as in the present case. Generally speaking, it
is discussed in conjunction with the movement of the drawing hand away from the
target as an integral part of the accomplishment of the loose. What they have to
say on the matter is largely suggestive of modern teaching: the hands are to
move away from each other (sc. in line with the target), the chest to be widely
expanded, and the shoulder-blades drawn together. In Arab Archery (pp. 60-61)
there would seem to be no doubt that the author is speaking of a follow-through
along these lines, though this is not immediately apparent from the English
translation, in which, to judge from parallel texts (e.g. Tabsirah, 74a-b;
Wadih, 242), the technical sense of the key verb would seem to have eluded the
trans- lator, The verb to which we refer is that interpreted as ‘release’ in
cases such as ‘releasing both hands simultaneously’, ‘beware of releasing one
hand before the other’, ‘releasing the one and leaving the other unreleased’,
etc. If we are not mistaken, the verb in fact is used in reference to positive
movement of the bow-hand towards the target and of the drawing hand away from
it.

The form of follow-through with the bow-hand advocated by Taybughà is the
&Aarrak, a term which, in the absence of a suitably simple English equivalent,
is more easily explained than translated. As in the case of the kind of
follow-through with which the modern target archer is familiar, the bow-arm
remains in line with the target and the hand is punched towards the mark. By
contrast, however, the wrist is bent and the hand dipped to rotate the upper end
of the bow directly forward. po

521From the technical standpoint the kharrah may be criticized on the grounds that
tilting of the string js apt to begin before the departure of the arrow. If such
a movement is invariable, however, the archer will learn to make allowance for
its effects. Furthermore, a positive action does make for consistency and
elimination of any variations in the movement of the bow that might otherwise
occur: - l -

The raison d'étre of the khatrah would appear to reside in the method of
grasping the bow as- advocated in Chapter8 where it is laid down that the little
finger should exert the greatest pressure ` on the handie, or grip, the
ring-finger less, and the middle finger least. If these instructions are
followed, it will be found that the bow's grip is subjected to forward rotary
pressure. Reduced to its simplest terms the explanation is not far to
seek. Although the main pressure of the grasp falls on the sides of the handle,
some pressure is nevertheless communicated to the back of the bow near the base
of the handle, while, at the top end of the latter, pressure is taken by the
belly at the point where it rests in the fork of the thumb and index finger
(Fig. 26). It is evidently Taybugha’s intention to permit the resulting forward
rotary pressure to find its logical con~ ` clusion in forward rotary movement
rather than to try to counter a natural tendency in this direction

522
7o SARACEN ARCHERY


by reversal of muscular action, for to arrest the movement in such a way could
lead to erratic shooting. The khaprah, then, may be considered a logical
development within the framework - of his whole method of shooting, and, as
such, must be commended.

523In MSS of the B and C groups the suggestion that the bow may be controlled by
the string’s lightly catching the forearm is replaced by the recommendation that
the downward movement of the bow be arrested by the siyak's lightly striking the
base of the armpit (frontispiece). The first method may well have been
idiosyncratic and on that account dropped, though whether by Taybugh4 himself in
some revised version or by an editor, it is impossible to say. It is note-
worthy, however, that a very similar method is mentioned later in the present
work (p. 130).


Ee m

524
" Tr


"d M

525



526FIG., 26, THE FOLLOW-THROUGH ADYOCATED EY TAvsucGá (See also Fig. 46.)


CHAPTER 15 ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK

527
i

According to traditional teaching propounded both by Turks well-versed in our
subject and by horsemen trained in the art of mounted combat,!* shooting as
practised by horse-archers falls into two main classes, namely, that known as
‘shooting at a slant’ syighaj; gigaj; see Glossary) wherein the archer directs
his shot downwards, and that known as 'gourd-shooting' (gabag) wherein he shoots
up into the sky (below, pp. 77-78). Both classes are fundamentally alike in that
each requires the rider first to come to a canter in which he gradually builds
up the speed of his mount, next to put it to a gallop, and then after shooting
to turn off at the end of the course.  The arrow is shot at full gallop, or, in
other words, after the horse has attained full stride and is in mid-career,
After the arrow has been discharged the horse should continue its gallop ‘to the
end of the field!.*

528
si


In either type of shooting it is essential first to gain a sound knowledge of
equitation, to acquire practice and skill with horses, to ride them in attack
and retreat, to learn to control a horse's head with the bridle, and so on,
until finally the rider is thoroughly accustomed to such details, and they
become a matter of habit to him. All this constitutes a highly important skill
which must be acquired by every horseman, particularly the Mameluke trooper, The
technique js best learned from masters in the art of lancing, for they have a
greater knowledge and ex- perience of these things than anyone else. It is from
such mentors that one learns the art of thrusting and parrying with the lance as
well as the technique of wielding the mace, sword play, and so on. Those who
attain perfection in such matters will have attained perfection in the art and
manners of the mounted warrior.*

529A combination of all these skills has only ever been brought to full perfection
in the case of certain Turks in Islam (the Bahri Mamelukes?) and those mounted
champions of religion, the Companions of the Prophet.* To their innate skill in
the art of mounted combat such men added a skill and valour in faith, witness,
and religious certitude together with a readiness to sacrifice their lives for
the love of God and the sake of His good pleasure as well as love of His
Messenger, Muhammad.* No nation ever offered them resistance nor was there ever
any nation with which they waged war but they buried it, humbled it, or took it
by the forelock. With succeeding generations, however, the bonds which had held
their predecessors together weakened as a result of disintegration, lack of
cohesion, and a paucity of entrants ‘for military training of the kind
described!, When this happened, they were overtaken by weakness and debility
commen- surate with the loss of solidarity they had sustained .

The horse-archer should contro! his horse’s head i a martingale (sirifsar) and
fit an ‘aid?  (musta'àn) to hold the reins in place. The martingale is a
familiar piece of equipment, the

530
7I


72 | SARACEN ARCHERY

531
purpose of which is to control the head of a horse whose neck is poorly bent to
the bridle, The need for it arises because a mount of this kind, when pressed by
its rider, will put its head down and toss it up and, in consequence, gallop
uncollectedly. It is therefore liable either to fall or strike its rider ‘in the
chest?” with its head. This, then, is why a mount whose neck is not properly
bent to the bridle must be equipped with a i

Our second item, the aid, is a folded strap fitted to the end of the rezns to
enable the rider to keep them securely in his right hand. It should be fitted
under the knot that fastens the reins together at the top, and a second knot
tied in the reins to limit the movement of the horse’s head when necessary. This
second knot will be quite familiar to cavalrymen and equetries® from its use on
the polo field. The pommel, which goes in between the reins, should lie below
the second knot (i.e. the reins as shortened by the second knot may be slipped
over the pommel, .  which will keep them in place and hold the horse's head).” 3
|

532Because of the harassing discomforts it may cause, the mace should be placed
beneath the — stirrup-leather to prevent it from shifting about. The mace is
familiar enough to require no com- ment, There are certain horsemen, however,
who are ignorant of the techniques of the cavalryman, and, when such a one
gallops his horse, his mace shifts about beneath his thigh and works its way
out, with the result that it either hampers the rider or drops off. The proper
procedure in this case is for the rider to secure the shaft of his mace well in
beneath the leather so as to allow it no freedom of movement whatever. Although
this is all commonplace so far as the instructed are concerned, it is not so
with the majority of people. The point must therefore be mentioned because the
purpose of manuals is to instruct the ignorant and to remind the conversant of
what they may have forgotten or overlooked.

The aid should be secured to the right hand by means of a ‘retainer’ (mahbas) on
the ring-finger.  This item is fastened to the aid by a thin thong and serves to
attach the aid to the ring-finger to prevent it from slipping from its grasp
when shooting. This operation should be carried out after mounting. (See Plate
12.)

533In sitting 2 horse it is of fundamental importance for the rider to sit erect in
the middle of its back and then to lean forward slightly as he breaks into a
canter (or, according to another version, "to sit up straight at the canter and
then to lean forward slightly as he puts his mount to full gallop’). The
inclination should be such that it is imperceptible; it is only a slight
inclination accompanying a forward rise as the knees are pressed in firmly to
grip the horse.

The length of the stirrup is determined by the length of the rider’s leg, for
horsemen differ in size, and each man has his own particular length. The stirrup
must be made to fit the leg and be neither too long nor too short, but, as has
been proved by experience, correspond exactly to the length of the leg. What the
rider should do is to sit erect in the centre of the saddle, slip his fest from
the stirrups, let them hang down, and look at their position. If the bottom edge
of the stirrup touches the inner ankle-bone, the heel of the foot being always
lower than the stirrup, this will give the correct measurement. If the edge is
higher or lower, it should be lengthened or shortened accordingly until it is of
the appropriate length. This is an important and well- respected principle which
it will be profitable to observe.

534To lodge the little toes in the stirrup, they should be pressed against the
outer support of the latter, the outer being the opposite of the inner which
lies next to the animal. The foot itself should be pressed down in a horizontal
position. In other words, no part of the foot, whether toes or heel, should
point upwards or downwards. On the contrary, both toes and heel should be on the
same level and be held firmly in position—though there is something to be said
for having the heel dip slightly from the stirrup towards the ground. The foot
should not be brought so close to the horse’s flank as to touch it, but rather
held a little way away from it. It should not, however, be too far out from the
animal's flank, but as close as it may be without actually touching it, except
when the mount is given the heel; The knees and calves, on the other hand,
should be held well into the animal. When kicking the horse's flank with the
spur, the position of the latter


ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK 73

535
should be a span or less away from the site of the girth. It should be no
further away than | that, otherwise it is a fault in the eyes of the cavairyman.


iii

536
Holding the reins with middle finger and ring-finger, the archer should grasp
the bow with the whole hand. In other words, he should set the whole of his palm
and his fingers to the handle of his bow and, using only the middle finger and
ring-finger of the same hand, hold the reins in the middle until the moment he
draws ‘so that he can nock!.!* Once he is at the draw, it makes no difference
whether the reins are slipped or not.

When charging, he stands in the stirrups and leans forward ever so slightly,
taking care not to lean over too far. It is a half, and not a full, standing
position that is required as the rider rises in his stirrups. In precise terms,
he should stand in this manner and lean forward slightly over the saddle-bow,
bending his waist over a little so as to set his navel on it.

537In grasping the arrow it is of fundamental importance for the archer to take it
up with the whole of his hand and all fingers as he would a stave. Its nock
should be pointing to his rear and its head - to his fore, and the shaft held in
his grasp st a point two-thirds of its length away from the head. After grasping
the arrow in this way he nocks, setting it on the string with the three
appropriate fingers in the usual way as described earlier (above, p. 47). When
the arrow is nocked, its head should occupy a position between the horse's ears,
but above the animal’s head without catching it at all.

Kicking the horse into the charge, nocking the arrow, drawing the bow!? with the
arrow in place, and slipping the rein from the left hand should all be carried
out after the manner of a single operation. The charger by this time should be
in full carcer, and, as soon as the archer has completed the sequence of
operations just described, he should hold himself fat the draw"?  as still as
some bird that stills its wings in flight and holds them motionless, such as the
vulture, eagle, or the like. To put the matter plainly, he should move the bow
neither up nor down with his left forearm, The same rule applies to his right
arm. In other words, both arms should be kept in the same plane as his horse
continues to charge as fast as it possibly can.

538A point that should have been made is this: lest the horse flag at the gallop
and need to be whipped, the rider should be equipped with a switch that can be
secured to the ring-finger of his right hand along with the aid that is holding
the reins. This he can then use to whip up his flagging charger before taking up
his arrow "in full career! !* and executing the subsequent opera- tions as
already described.

To return to the point which we left.! When once he has drawn the bow ‘and
brought his arrow to full draw!!5 he should hold himself as still as some bird
such as a vulture or eagle—for both these birds soar in the air without any
movement of the wings—until he reaches the mark.  When he draws level with the
latter and his left stirrup comes a little in front of it, he should release the
arrow and gracefully follow through with the appropriate thrust (khaprah)
(above, p.  68) as he combines elegant dexterity unmarred by clumsiness with
deliberate movement and a clean loosc.!*

539
iv


There are many ways of shooting an arrow from horseback. Of these, we deem
seventeen to be the right number, but the rule we pass on from our master
archers (ustadin) is that there are ten, and because the masters are agreed on
these ten we take them to be primary, the rest being secondary, whose number
might be increased. (On the problematical question of classification as raised
by the account that now follows, see p. 80.) : :

540To begin with, the archer may shoot downwards to the left parallel to his left
thigh. This is, as we have already said, what is termed ‘shooting at the slant’,
the same type of shot in an upward


74 ^ SARACEN ARCHERY direction being called *gourd-shooting'. There is a third
way of shooting which lies between these two (i.e. shooting horizontally). i 2

541if the archer ‘charges with the intention of shooting, but!!? does not succeed
in making his $hot in the manner described, either because he has been too slow
in nocking or for any other reason, he should not loose his arrow, If it is
merely a matter of his overshooting the mark with his horse, he should continue
in his charge, all the while spurring his mount. Having drawn the bow, he should
then ease it down without loosing, for archers account a mistimed loose a fault,

The archer may turn his chest to the right and, in so doing, skilfully incline
his hand to cant the upper limb of the bow, which is the top half!* and called
the ‘shooting limb’, above the animal’s neck. "^! By adopting the position
described he can shoot an arrow that is fully effective against anyone in front
of him either at short range or long.*** It is the horse that imposes the
necessity of the procedure indicated, for should the archer shoot without
canting the bow, its lower limb will strike the animal,

542If he so wishes, the archer may, once the bow is drawn and the arrow at full
draw, deftly

bring the lower limb of his bow over the horse’s back to his right side.*"*
Then, after holding at full draw for a moment or 50** and resting before
release, let him shoot by the shoulder of his horse. ! " By turning his chest to
the left with a skilful and gentle twist from the waist, which should be brought
round in a relaxed movement that is both graceful and effortless, and then
drawing and canting his bow above the horse’s croup,** the archer can shoot to
his rear (i.c. from the left with his bow aslant). Should he wish to shoot to
the rear, but in a manner different from that just described, he should point
the top of his bow upwards, keeping its leg to the ground and slightly away from
the flank of his charger so that he will not strike the animal when he releases
the arrow (i.e. from the left with his bow upright).

543Both methods which have been described as suitable for shooting to the rear may
be used whether the target be high, as in gourd-shooting, or low, as in shooting
at the slant. There are



544

Fic, 27. SHOOTING REARWARDS FROM HORSEBACK ~ Note reins and switch in right
hand. à; From a fifteenth-century miniature, Topkapı Saray: Müzesi, 2163,
Istanbul,

545
ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK 75


then, four kinds of shot: two for shooting at the slant and two for
gourd-shooting.*** There is also the possibility of two other kinds of shot from
the right of the horse’s croup? "above the right thigh?,** but to shoot in this
way is difficult.

546Should the archer prefer another method, he may, after drawing the bow and
holding at full draw in the usual way, bring his right hand up over his head and
then, tucking the latter in beneath his right forearm so that his hand lodges in
the hollow in the nape of his neck, shoot - (to his rear) hard by his horse’s
thigh, either to right or left of it. Should he wish to adopt this technique for
shooting forwards, he should, after drawing and holding, carefully bring in his
bow-hand over the neck of the horse and shoot downwards in front of the right
knee. This type of shooting, which can be used either on the right flank of the
horse or the left, is termed jarmaki by archers and also admits of four kinds of
shot (see end of next paragraph and Plate 14).

If one wishes "to use this technique in another way!*" the bow should be turned
around so that the string comes into immediate contact with the back of the left
forearm outside the body.  This should be done before drawing the bow. The
archer's next step is to draw from behind him in the manner described after
first nocking the arrow, What he does is first to place his left forearm behind
the hollow in the nape of the neck between head and neck.*** Next, he nocks the
arrow, locks, draws, and then, using the four kinds of shot already described,
shoots from behind from the nape of his neck—the four kinds of shot being two to
the fore of the archer and two to his rear,

547Finally, the archer may shoot anyone he likes from beneath his horse’s neck, on
either the right side or the left, provided he is shooting at short range. This
brings us to the last of the various methods of shooting from horseback. What
the archer should do here is to draw his bow with the arrow and hold. He should
then twist his left arm and shoot beneath his horse's neck from one side to the
other. This technique imposes upon him the necessity of discarding bis horse's??
martingale and leaning over somewhat at an angle. ‘This requires long
practice.159

With these two methods of shooting the number of the ten basic ways in which an
arrow may be shot from horseback is complete. There is, however, no restriction
upon the limit to which the forms of shooting may go, for they are governed only
by men’s aspirations, by their skill in the techniques of mounted combat, by the
extent of their intelligence and acumen, and by their manual dexterity, Each
archer, therefore, may add to his repertoire as he wishes.

548After discharging the arrow at the target in any of the aforementioned ways, the
bow should be cast down from the fist on to the left forearm or upper arm. The
string should be on the outside, that is to say, towards the archer's back. The
left arm should be inside between the bow and the string. The bow will then be
suspended on the archer's forearm and his hand left free to take up the reins
again.

All the various forms of mounted archery which have been mentioned should be
executed at the charge, with the horse all the while at full gallop. There
should be no slackening of pace, even after the loose, until the horse reaches
the end of the field. To put it plainly, the rider should continue to press his
mount after casting his bow on to his forearm.!! The horse should finally swerve
off to the left at the end of the field.

549
y


As regards procedure and rules there is no difference between gourd-shooting and
shooting at the slant, for it has already been explained that the two are
essentially the same, the only real . difference being that in the one the
direction is downward, whereas in the other it is upward. In gourd shooting the
best way to shoot is for the archer to look upwards over his mount’s croup
. when he is just beyond the mast (khashabak).?? His best policy is to follow
the arrow with his gaze until it has passed beyond (sic) the mark. To follow the
arrow to its target applies to both . types of shooting fand indeed to all types
of árchery!.**

550
76 SARACEN ARCHERY


: A point to be stressed here is that when archers meet for the purpose of
engaging ineitherof the ‘two exercises and one of them begins to charge and
start shooting, a second party should not come in behind until he is a good
distance away from him so that, should the first by any chance fall, he, the
second, will be able to turn his horse away to avoid coming down on top of him,
Another point to remember is that the archer should not retrieve his arrow until
all the shooting is over... .

551The field should have an even surface and, for the horse, be in fit condition
underfoot. If one side of the field is higher than the other, the charge must
follow the sscent. Furthermore, a crosswind blowing from one side of the field
to the other is what is required. If, however, there is a direct wind, then it
should be behind the archer as he makes his charge.

In gourd-shooting the archer should beware of his horse’s bumping into the mast
and for this reason keep a man’s arm-span between his horse and the mast. The
closer the archer is to the mast, the better and more skilful his shooting must
be. Great caution must, however, be exercised in this respect because when the
archer is engaged in shooting and slips his horse’s reins, his mount is liable
to swerve towards the mast and collide with it with fatal results to both horse
and rider. I personally have seen with my own eyes a skilful archer belonging to
the company of His Excellency, the late Azdamur (Ozdemir) the Treasurer, Viceroy
of.Tripoli,** whose Amir of the Hunt** he was, experience such a mishap on a
public holiday in the city of Tripoli in Syria.  He shot at the gourd and was
proclaimed by the onlookers. Then, even as he was shooting and priding himself
on the crowd’s applause, he took his mind off his horse, and it collided with
the mast. As a result of the accident he died that same day as also did his
horse.

552Everyone, therefore, who practises archery on horseback should see to it that he
does not shoot from an untried horse. Indeed, his very first steps should be to
try out his horse without engaging in archery. He should introduce it to the
‘gourd’ and the ‘slant’ while riding at walking pace without at any time putting
it to the charge and do this several times, so that it may get to know both
kinds of shooting and not take fright and shy when confronted with them. At the
next stage he should put his horse to the charge as he would in actual shooting
without, however, at this juncture, actually shooting. "The purpose of this is
to accustom his horse to continue its gallop after the reins have been dropped
from the hand.1*7 When he finds that his horse can make 2 good entry and
approach, displaying no faults and being sure-footed, be may thereafter shoot at
his pleasure.

Should an archer wish to avoid the risk of bumping into the mast, he should
stretch a rope across the field between two masts and attach the gourd to the
middle of the rope. He can then charge, pursuing a completely unobstructed
course under the gourd. It is a much better policy - to erect two such masts
rather than one, especially for novices, so as to protect them from this - great
hazard, — —

553If horse-archers happen to be out in the open country and wish to practise
gourd-shooting, but : can obtain neither masts nor rope with which to erect the
target, a circle should be marked on a stretch of flat terrain?! with a diameter
of about 1o arm-spans (22 yards). They can then charge and, upon reaching the
centre (i.e. area) of the circle, shoot up into the sky. Any arrow that comes
down again in the centre of the circle can be considered accurately shot, for
this circle will be the equivalent of a gourd or the same as a target. Indeed
this practice calls for more precise shooting and is far less dangerous than the
true method.1 I have heard it said that any archer who, upon shooting, bends his
arms behind him a little will rarely miss the circle. You may also fix up a hoop
on a spear like the birfas (see Comment) and shoot at that,


vi

554
The field should be divided into three sections and the mark placed at the end
of the second.  To achieve success and a proficient performance, the archer
should begin by cantering over the


ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK 77

555
first third of the field arid then give the horse its head as he prepares to
perform in the manner already described (or, another version: ‘So that he can
nock*! and perform proficiently, the archer should canter from the start over
the first third of the field, charge over the second, shoot at the target, and
finally continue his charge to the end of the third.’**), The shorter the range
to be traversed by the archer, the more skilful his shooting must be. The longer
the field, the casier it will be for the novice. They say that the maximum
length of a field should be a distance of 130? arm-spans (about 284 yards) and
the minimum 60 (about 131 yards).

For best results in shooting at the slant the archer should swing ground to his
rear and shoot at tbe mark by the animal's left thigh. In this class of
shooting, furthermore, he should override the mast by one arm-span and then
shoot in the turning position.

556For shooting at the slant he should also use an arrow with a slim head, such as
the butt head (amdjiyyah), and not a yásij arrow (broadhead?), for the latter
may sever the arrows of his col- leagues (already in the target) and even do his
colleagues themselves some harm. The best arrow for gourd shooting is the
"small, light! cylinder type.


COMMENT

557
The foregoing chapter may well be considered the most important part of our
book, for although there is no lack of eye-witness accounts of the oriental
horse-archer’s skill and pro- ficiency, we know of no record of his techniques
that is as detailed and instructive as that of


Taybughi.

558In MSS of the CD groups the chapter is prefaced with some brief but informative
observations on mounted archery (C, 77b—78a; C*, 1215-1232; and D!, 52b-53a; D*,
76a-b, respectively C and D, in which the accounts are similar but not
identical). Not surprisingly, the Turks and Turkmens (C), or the "Furkmens and
Mongols (D) are named as the principal exponents from whom the horse-archers of
the Middle East acquired their skills.


1. Qabag and Qighaj |

559. (2) Qabag. From the discussion in Appendix 6 it will be seen that this word
denotes (i) a gourd proper; (ii) a gourd transformed into a pigeon-container and
used as a target for horse- archers; (iii) an artificial gourd fashioned out of
a precious metal and serving the same purpose as the preceding; (iv) a mast
surmounted by any of the preceding; (v) in conjunction with the word ‘shooting’,
shooting from horseback (or otherwise?) at an elevated target.

In our text ít is natural to assume that for everyday purposes the mark was an
ordinary gourd.  It cannot, however, be taken for granted that the latter
sufficed for ceremonial occasions, for we know from more than one source that it
was a practice of Mameluke rulers to transform gourds into containers for
pigeons or doves. At festivals and on high days and holidays horse-archers would
vie with one another to prove their marksmanship by freeing the birds from their
mast-top prisons (D). If the ‘gourd’ was of gold or silver, the successful
competitor would be awarded his tatget together with a robe of honour (Appendix
6).

560Something of the history of this exercise in Mameluke times has been outlined by
D. Ayalon (below, p. 78.) According to this scholar, the sport enjoyed great
popularity during the first Mameluke period (A.D. 1250-1382) and was in its
heyday in the sultanates of Baybars I, Qalaün and al-Ashraf Khalil, i.e. from
1260 to 1295. It was often performed on a grand scale with much pomp and
ceremonial at the births and circumcisions of the sons of the sultans or grand
amirs.  In the Circassian period (1382-1517), on the other hand, its popularity
appears to have waned, and references to it in contemporary sources are scarce.

Although there is every reason to suppose that the exercise was introduced to
the Middle

561
78 SARACEN ARCHERY


East from Central Asia where it was practised by the Turkmens (C, D), its
origins cannot be traced from written sources. We, for our part, venture the
hypothesis that it arose from the need to hunt birds from horseback. Birds of
the right size and kind would be required not only for food, but also for
feathers with which to make and repair arrows, and we may well believe the
Chinese poet’s assertion that ‘Tartar chieftains shoot so well that the birds
are afraid to fiy’ (Chinese Poems, tr. A. Waley, p, 128). If acceptable, the
hypothesis may be pressed a stage further with the suggestion that a pole
surmounted by a suitable target, perhaps a bundle of rags, would be erected near
a nomad encampment so that boys might be taught the fundamentals of the art, and
others afforded a valuable means of practice and amusement. Proficiency in
archery can be achieved only by constant practice, and some kind of facility,
however crude, must surely have been devised from the earliest times.

562From a purely military angle the main purpose of ‘gourd’ shooting must have lain
in its useful- ness as a means of developing the skill and agility of the
horse-archer. Some impression of the dexterity attainable may be formed from a
text to which Ayalon draws attention (Scripza, Pp. 55-56). In 1293, so we are
told, Amir Badr ad-Din al-Baysari devised a saddle with a very low back (that of
the normal saddle would be raised; cf. Plate 14) which he used for the gourd-
shooting event at one of the big festivals of the year. When he drew level with
the mast and then, contrary to normal practice, passed it without having made
his shot, it was thought he had lost his opportunity to shoot, but suddenly he
leaned right back with his head on the horse’s rump and, shooting from a supine
position, hit and broke the gourd.

The purpose of the sport is explained by Busbecq in the following terms:

563
“They [Turks of the sixteenth century] have a Custom derived from the Parthians,
that they counterfeit flying away on Horseback and presently turn back and kill
their unwary Pursuers.  The way they learn to do it, is this: They erect an High
Pole, almost in plain Ground, with a Brass globe atop of it; about this they
spur their Horses, and having got a little beyand, the Horse still Galloping,
they presently turn about, and flying along, shoot an Arrow into that Globe. The
frequent use hereof makes them to expect, that their Bow being turned in their
flight, their unwary Enemy is shot through." (Embassy into Turkey, London, 1694,
pp. 210-11.)


In Persia the Maydan-i Shah in Isfahan seems to have been an important centre
for this kind of sport, for we have more than one account of the dexterity of
the archers there. A French Huguenot traveller of the seventeenth century
writes:

564
‘In the midst of the piazza stands a kind of May-Pole, or Mast of a Ship, where
the People exercise Shooting at Birds. When the King comes to shoot, they set a
Cup of Gold upon the top of the Mast, which he is to strike down with an
Arrow. To which purpose he must ride full speed, nor is he permitted to shoot
till he has past the May-Pole, rurning himself upon the crupper of his Horse
. . . The Cup belongs to him that strikes it down; and I have seen Sha-
Seft...in five Courses strike down three Cups...’ (Quoted by E. Crawshay
Williams, fom Persia, London, 1907, pp. 281-82. For a similar account, see Sir
John Chardin’s Travels, » p. 200.)


With variations in the nature of the target (melon, arpus, apple, trencher
filled with small Silver coin, criminals under death sentence, heads of rebels,
etc.) the game is frequently men- tioned by European travellers, The height of
the mast probably varied, but it is given by one writer as ‘some twenty-five
feer’. (F. B. Bradley-Birt, Through Persia from the Gulf to the Caspian, London,
1909, pp. 266-67.)

565(b) Qighaj. In the present context this term (see Appendix 6) may denote: (i) an
exercise in which an archer, shooting parallel with his left thigh, directs his
shot at a ground target; (ii) any kind of shooting from horseback in which the
target is so situated as to require the archer to shoot downwards; (iii) the
target at which either of the preceding is directed.


ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK 79

566
Nothingissaidin our textabout the nature of the mark, but the view that it may
have been a butt made of a wicker basket filled with sand (below, p. 173) is not
unreasonable. The possibility that the term gighaj denoted other targets of a
similar kind should not, however, be excluded. Hansard.  __without an accurate
reference-—quotes an eye-witness account of a display outside Cairo in the
sixteenth (?) century which records that ‘on one side were three artificial
hillocks of sand, about fifty paces distant one from the other, and on the
summit of cach stood a spear and a banner, being marks destined for the archers’
(Book of Archery, pp. 34-36). Busbecq describes an ordinary Turkish butt as
being a bank of sandy, gravelly earth, four feet from the ground and formed with
boards (op. cit., p. 206). (See also Plate IO.)

Although Taybughà makes no direct reference to the range at which the target was
engaged in the gighaj exercise (sense (i) above), an archer shooting parallel
with his left thigh and half standing in his stirrups with a slight forward lean
would, we suggest, have had his mark almost directly beneath his left knee at
the moment of loosing. The practical value of this form of shoot- ing is
obvious, and it is almost otiose to point out its direct relevance to hunting
and warfare.  From a military standpoint the ability to engage an awkwardly
situated ground target would be an essential qualification in a horse-archer. It
is easy to envisage a situation, for instance, in which the mounted warrior in
the heat of battle suddenly comes at full tilt upon an enemy, perhaps just
unhorsed and either lying on the ground or in the act of rising lmost beneath
the hooves of the onrushing horse, With a loaded bow and no time to switch to
sword or mace the man on horseback could only dispatch his foe with a quick shot
at an awkward angle. The essential purpose of gighaj shooting, therefore, would
certainly be to train archers to kill under every possible condition in combat.

567Between the rwo forms of shooting, gighaj and gabag, there was, so Taybughá
tells us, a third, by which, assuming that the first two are directed almost
vertically downward and upward, he must mean shooting in a horizontal, or nearly
horizontal, plane. The classification is not a pedantic superfluity, for,
whereas considerable contortion is needed to be able to shoot either almost
directly downwards or upwards, the body is tolerably erect when the shooting is
horizontal.  If an archer could shoot accurately both upwards and downwards, any
shot that was roughly horizontal would have seemed relatively simple.


2. Reins and Accoutrements

568
(a) Sirifsar, ‘martingale’. The word is undoubtedly a borrowing from the Persian
sar-afsár, which is nebulously explained in Persian dictionaries as a kind of
headstall, or as the head of the reins, meaning that part which is taken into
the hands, and so on (e.g. Farhang-i Nafisi and Steingass, s.v.), In our text we
have an unambiguous definition. On the other hand, we are not told exactly what
kind of martingale was used for the purpose in question. Under certain condi-
tions in which a horse might stumble, a running martingale will allow the animal
to lift its head sufficiently to recover its balance, whereas a standing
martingale could be a serious impediment.  The need for a martingale was
evidently considered by some to be a particularly bad fault in à horse-archer's
mount (C1, 78b; C^, 1243).

After examining a large number of miniature paintings we have found only one
certain depiction of a martingale for the fourteenth century (A. Sakisian, La
miniature persane, Paris, 1929, Fig. 31, p. xxii École Mongole, commencement du
xive siècle}. This, like those daung from about the sixteenth century, presents
the appearance of a standing martingale.

569(b) Musta'án, ‘aid’. This is a technical term which, in the sense it has in our
text, is not recorded in any Arabic dictionary known to us. The translation we
adopt is based on a literal rendering, viz. ‘that to which recourse is had for
help’. According to one definition, the aid was a fine leather strap which was
about two spans long—presumably when folded, though it is by no means certain
that it was always a loop as indicated in our text. It was used by some archers,
but not


So SAKACEN ARCHERY

570
others, according to personal preference (C1, 79a; C$, 1242-b). Leather, it
would seem, was not an essential material; cord would do equally well (B, et
ai.).

(c) Mahbas, ‘retainer’, According to our text this item was worn on the
ring-finger to enable the archer to retain his reins while shooting. It is,
perhaps, not commonly realized that control ofa horse is virtually lost when the
reins are dropped. It has been modern cavalry practice to train the horse to
follow a straight course under these circumstances, and there would seem to be
cvery reason to suppose that mounted warriors in past ages would adopt the same
policy. To regain control the archer must recover his reins as rapidly as
possible.

571While it is clear from our various MSS that the ‘retainer’ was a ring of some
kind, there are

ifferences of detail in the definitions given. According to one explanation, it
was both (i) a ring tied into the reins beneath the rein-knot, presumably to
accommodate the aid, and (ii) a ring used for the purpose described in our text
(Ct, 79b; C?, 125b; cf. D1, 54b; D4, 77b). Elsewhere it is defined as a ring
designed to slip over the top end of the loop formed by the aid to make a
smaller loop which would accommodate the ting-finger (a, sra).

572
3. Forms of Shooting from Horseback


From the text, as it stands, it is not easy to discern which are the ten forms
of shooting ftom horseback declared to be basic, or to conjecture with any hope
of certainty which are the seven- teen of our author, The matter is further
complicated by the fact that in the MSS of groups C

573
Is a form basic because of the direction in which a shot can be made? In other
words, is it basic because it is vital to the attainment of the maximum field
within which the archer can effectively operate? Or is it basic because of
technique and posture? Or, finally, is it basic by reason of 2 combination of
all such factors,

While it is not intended to embark upon an unprofitable enumeration of
classifications that may be developed on the foundations implied by our
questions, it is at the same time appropriate to point out that direction does
not always demand a fundamental change in posture. In certain situations the
archer’s posture may remain virtually unchanged even though the directions in

574
not shoot the gourd while sitting upright in his saddle by merely raising the
bow-hand above his head. On the other hand, to shoot downwards at long range
would not require a posture funda- mentally different from that used for
shooting in a roughly horizontal plane.

To those for whom esoteric interpretations have no appeal one solution that may
commend itself is as follows:

575
- To left flank, forward and downward parallel with thigh (gighaj),

. To left flank, forward and upward (qabaq).

576- In horizontal plane (target roughly level with left shoulder).

. Ahead with bow, upper limb to right, canted above horse’s neck.

577- To right flank, forward and downward.

- To left flank rear, upward or downward, with bow canted over horsc's croup.
- Fo left flank rear, upward or downward, with bow vertical.

578. Jarmaki of two kinds, each with four shots.

. Beneath horse's neck from right to left.

579- Beneath horse’s neck from left to right.


OW waxy Ate Bu Nox

580
-


ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK 81

581
Shots 6 and 7 executed on the right-hand side may reasonably be discounted
either as variations or as forms of shooting too difficult to be considered
basic. Unless the shooter was ambidexterous —and nowhere is there any suggestion
that horse-archers were trained to be so—such shots would certainly be most
difficult. For possible alternatives to 8, 9, and 10, see J. D. Latham, ‘Notes
on Mamlük Horse-archers', in BSOAS XXXII, 1969, pp. 265-66.

For the sake of comparison, which will afford the reader an opportunity of
evaluating additional or discrepant details contained in them (italicized
below), we have thought it worth while to précis in the following composite
account the versions contained in groups C and D (C3, 83b- 86b; C, 131b-136b;
D!, 58a-60b; D*, 79b-81b; portions occurring in D, but not in C, are indicated
in parentheses):

582The ways in which an arrow may be shot amount to fifteen and have to do more
particularly with shooting at a ground target (gighaj). An archer may shoot
downwards parallel with his



583

Fic, 28, SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK Schematic operational field viewed from above.

584
82 SARACEN ARCHERY


left thigh—this is gighas—or upwards, which kind of shooting is called gabag
. . . The rider may turn his chest to the right, canting the upper limb of his
bow across the horse's neck with the arrowhead above its right ear. The bow may
also be canted with the lower limb across the horse's neck, and this will also
make three (shots? Up, down, horizontal?). Thus, the archer wil] be able to
strike a mortal blow against an enemy in front of him either at short range or
long, For this kind of shooting he would do well to have not less than 10 cubits
(about 6 yards) between himself and his target.

585To shoot right in front of his horse, he should first draw and hold and, tilting
the lower limb of his bow across the animal’s neck, transfer it to his right
side. To do this, he should bring up the lower part of his right thigh on to the
saddle and turn his left until the front of it comes against the saddle as it
presses against the stirrup next to the horse's belly. (D: Some shoot at the
mark as soon as the horse’s head draws level with i.)

To shoot at a target to his rear, the archer should easily and without straining
or forcing turn to the left from his waist and draw his bow at an angle across
his horse's croup. He may also shoot with the bow in a vertical position. Both
methods can be used to shoot upwards or downwards and at short or long
range. (D: The shot is made when the croup is in line with the mark.) This gives
four kinds of rear Shot, and two more at the horizontal will bring the number uD
to six, Then there are two more on the right side, one immediately over the
right thigh and the other to the left of it, bat to shoot in this way is
difficult. [We emend here, reading ‘asir ‘difficult’ for ‘askr ‘ten’, with which
the subject matter has undoubtedly been made to accord, ]

586For another kind of shot to the rear the archer, after drawing and holding, may
bring his right hand up over his head, tuck his head in beneath his right wrist
so that his hand rests in the nape of his neck. This technique will enable him
to engage a target close by the right or left thigh of his mount, By bringing
round his bow-haad once his right hand is anchored in the nape of his neck, he
can shoot forward and dowaward to either side; for by bringing his bow round
over his horse’s neck he can shoot down in front of his right knee. This form of
shooting is called jarmakt, The technique can be varied by holding the bow, as
yet undrawn, with the string on the outside of the left forearm. Bringing the
grip of his bow to the nape, the archer can then nock and lock on his right
shoulder. He can nock while his left hand grips the reins, raise both arms, tuck
in his head under the right forearm, draw, and shoot in the four ways already
described, ie. two to fore and two to rear.

Finally, the archer can shoot to left or right under the horse’s neck. These two
methods complete the fifteen. Here the archer draws and holds, then bends his
left arm to shoot under the neck from one side to the other. This kind of shot
requires him to discard the martingale and lean over slightly. It needs a good
deal of practice. This completes the basic ways of shooting; secondary ways are
legion.

587
As in the case of our own text we are confronted with the problem of deciding
which forms of shooting are considered basic and, again, it is a matter of
conjecture. Under these circumstances it is best to leave the question open.


4. Jarmaki (?): the Term and the Technique

588
Almost all MSS give this term as Jarmaki, jarmuki or the like, which immediately
suggests a relative adjective derived from Çermik or Cermük in the province of
Diyarbakir in modern Turkey, but we tentatively propose that the word be
regarded as the Arabic adjectival form of the Turkish adjective çarpık (
>jarbak>jarmak) ‘awry’, i.e. deviating from the line of sight, Such a term makes
excellent sense, for, by anchoring the drawing hand in the nape of the neck, the
line of the arrow is displaced, albeit deliberately, to the left of the line of
sight in order to


ON SHOOTING FROM HORSEBACK 83

589
shoot at a target unattainable by means of the normal draw to the chin or side
of the face.

Practical trials show that a modern Western archer not trained in this method of
shooting from boyhood will not find it easy. If the bow is drawn in the normal
way with the string inside the arm, the weapon has to be tilted to enable a full
draw to be achieved. With the string outside it is difficult to avoid hitting
the elbow on loosing. How any accuracy can be achieved is another
problem. Basically, an archer draws to the face so that he can orientate his
shot by looking along the arrow. As the jarmaki technique results in a
relatively large lateral displacement of the arrow from the line of sight,
shooting by this method must be purely instinctive, and skilful application can,
it is clear, only be achieved by considerable practice and experience.

590The advantage of the technique is that it increases the lateral angle over which
a horse-archer can engage a target. By way of example, let us suppose that an
enemy appears about 20° to the right of the direction in which the archer is
riding, and, for some reason, he cannot, or does not wish to, turn to the right
to engage. By rising slightly in his stirrups, putting his weight on the left
foot, and twisting his body to the right so as to bring his right thigh over the
top of the saddle, he can shoot in the normal manner, drawing to the face. When
he reaches the limit to which he can turn his body in this way, but still needs
to extend the arc over which he can shoot because his target lies to the right
of that limit, he can do so by drawing behind the neck as described and
artificially deflecting the line of his arrow to the right. Apart from enabling
a horseman to engage targets over a wider arc, the jarmaki technique is of
definite merit for shooting at very close range when the rider is almost
immediately above his target. Similarly it could be applied by an archer
standing at the top of a fortress and shooting at an enemy at the base of the
wall (below, p. 137)-

Some brief mention is made of this form of shooting by de Bertier, Cordier, and
Guglielmini in Le tir à Parc (Paris, 1900), pp. 9-10, where it is stated,
contrary to the information supplied by Taybughà, that the string must of
necessity lie outside the left arm. Attention is drawn to the support afforded
the drawing hand by the neck which allows the use of a very powerful bow, and
the view is taken by the authors that the horseman’s position favours this kind
of shooting which is the only easy way of engaging a target to the rear. What is
most interesting from our point of view is the statement on the authority of a
contemporary traveller that the technique was still used in Turkestan where he
had several times seen it applied by riders of his escort. The informant had
observed that the horsemen of Turkestan showed great skill in using either hand
to shoot a bow in this way.

591A point worth mentioning here, not because it is in any way connected with the
jarmaki technique, but because it calls for comment too brief for separate
treatment, is the difficulty of shooting under a horse’s neck. How the bow could
fail to strike the horse when the arrow was loosed is almost beyond our
comprehension.


5. Birjas

592‘The birdjas game’, writes Ayalon, ‘is often referred to [in Mameluke historical
sources], but without any particulars whatsoever’ (op. cit., p. 56). Vocalized
as birjas, burjás, or barjás, the term is variously defined by almost all the
lexicographers as (a) ‘a game, similar to that called jarid, in which mounted
players combated or pursued each other throwing sticks’ (Dozy, s.v.); (b) “a
butt to shoot at, especially elevated high in the air’ (Steingass, s.v.); (c) ‘a
mark to shoot at (Redhouse s.v.). In our text the term denotes something
resembling a hoop on a spear. That it was such is undoubtedly true, for some
account of an exercise called the ‘birjds charge’ is to be found in a
sixteenth-century Paris MS in which the point is confirmed (Bibliothèque
Nationale, Arabe 2,826: Kitáb al-makhzün jámi' al-funün, 104a-b). In this the
cavalryman, having set a hoop by means of a wooden truck on top of a short
lance, charges and, engaging the target on his left, aims to snatch up the hoop
with the end of his full-length ‘candle-form’ lance. How the term


-z YERINILU GIN ADUCEA 1 comes to denote ‘a mark to shoot at in Persian and
Turkish can easily be understood both from our text and from other references to
archers’ shooting through rings used in lance exercises (e.g. Hansard, Book of
Archery, p. 121). The definition recorded by Blachére (Dict., s.v.) is,
therefore, correct.

593



594CHAPTER 16 ON SHOOTING THE STIRRUP CROSSBOW FROM HORSEBACK!


To shoot this weapon, the mounted archer should equip himself with a broad strap
after the style of the familiar Frankish drawing-strap (jabbadh; Fig. 29). The
drawing-claw (Ahaitdf) should have two hooks. What the archer does is to slip
the drawing-strap over his left shoulder like a strap of the kind used by
porters for heaving massive loads (hamilat al-haykal), placing the claw below
his right armpit "close to the nipple’.? "When he wishes to shoot, he takes the
reins in his left hand and the bow in his right and sets the string in the
hooks, keeping the stock right in

595



596Fic. 29, CROSSBOWMAN WITH A CLAW FOR BENDING HIS Crosssaw ATTACHED TO HIS BELT
(DRAWING-STRAP) (From Payne-Gallwey, Crossbow, Fig. 33.)


85

597
86 SARACEN ARCHERY


between them.!? He then bends forward in a stooping position until the front
half of his right foot is in the stirrup with which his weapon is equipped. The
archer now stands in his stirrups, as he draws the string at its centre point
until it catches in the stock-nut (jawzah) and he can then settle it firmly with
his right hands. This done, he bends over ‘forward, removes his foot from the
bow,! and, lifting the crossbow off the hook, transfers it to his left hand and
holds it along with his reins!.* He nocks his bolts (nabl) with the right hand
and shoots in the usual way to destroy the enemy.

598TFinding that the long, heavy bow that is made for men with a powerful pull of
roo razis Syrian weight (?; see p. 88) was a highly effective weapon in the
field, I made a stock for it, such as the stirrup crossbow has, and then for the
stock I designed a sturdy nut, which has proved to be one of the best there
is. One of its great advantages is that its action is automatic in that, once
the string is drawn right up to it, it catches it without the intervention of
any manual operation whatsoever. Another of its merits is that the string never
leaves the surface of the stock, and one is thus safeguarded against all mishaps
likely to befall the user of the usual stirrup crossbow.  The archer does not
have to adjust the nut immediately after each shot as he must with the normal
weapon of this kind. On the contrary, he doesn’t touch it with his hand at
all. I also fitted a long clip (khurtim, literally, ‘proboscis’) of horn over
the nut to prevent the bolts from falling out during shooting. (Cf. Fig. 30.)

This weapon has proved to be one of the most useful of all arms available to
warriors in the service of God and the most effective against the enemy. It is,
furthermore, a weapon so simple that even a slightly-built archer can, without
any discomfort, shoot a bow with a draw-weight close on one gintdr (100 rajls),
Syrian weight? (?; see p. 88), or even more. It is also an easier Weapon for the
learner than either the hand bow or the ordinary stirrup crossbow.f As a weapon,
its strength and effectiveness are facts which common sense cannot refute
because it does the Work of the normal bow of its type* but has greater
power. Furthermore, it can be used after only a few days’ practice. It would
take too long to elaborate upon its superiority and advantages. Let us then be
content with the little that has already been said, which is quite enough for
anyone of any wit and common sense.

599
COMMENT


The foregoing chapter is problematical. Quite apart from its complete absence
from A? and the different positions it occupies in the subject sequence of other
MSS (n. 1 to Ch. 16, p. 203), there are several respects in which the text of
the corresponding section in these other MSS differs from ours both in form and
substance. For the sake of example we now compare that portion of our version
which is marked with daggers with the corresponding portion in B!.

600
"T had observed this kind of bow for some time and seen the Arab bows with two
nocks in their necks that had been designed for this purpose, noting their
devastating effectiveness in the field. The usual types of nut, however, were
not as satisfactory as one might wish. I therefore racked my brains and finally
God, of His goodness and bounty, inspired me with the idea of a new kind of nut,
one of the merits of which is that when the bow is drawn and the string makes
contact with the nut, it catches the string automatically without any manual
intervention on the part of the archer. There is no need, then, for him to
adjust the nut imme- diately after each shot as is usually the case. Another of
its merits is that the string will not leave the body of the stock when drawn up
to the nut as happens with all other crossbows.  I next fitted a long clip of
horn over the nut to prevent the bolts from falling out, thus enabling the
archer to shoot in any direction he likes, The nut in question is of the usual
kind, the only


* NOTE, On the passage marked by daggers, see Comment.

601



602(SOX “Bry (0953047) ‘Aamppe-euseg uror) *K1n1u35 tuseju2Ass JO pus ‘Ueu
ATIO-DNINIVIAY HILM MOTSSOUD ONILIOdS ANY LHONVL TIVWS *ot ‘ol



603

oy YOANN ORUME KS)

604
difference being that when the string is released, it regains the same position
as before the loose Next, to replace the crossbow stirrup, I designed a somewhat
lighter hook which the arche can slip into his stitrup proper... This weapon,
which is a simple affair, is easier for the beginner to handle than the hand
bow, and he can shoot long bolts with it,’


Two points are particularly noteworthy, In the first place, it is only in A! and
a that the cross.  bow fitted with a stirrup is termed ark. In all MSS of the B
group it is merely termed gaw, ar-ryi, ‘crossbow’, Which term is correct it is
difficult to say without exhaustive investigation of the problem. We shall for
the present confine ourselves to pointing out that Mardi, writing twe centuries
earlier, clearly distinguishes between the Jarkh and gaws ar-rikab, stirrup
crossbow (BEO, XII, p. 132).

605The second point, which poses a much greater problem, concerns the weight of the
bow under discussion. In none of the B group MSS is there any mention of 100
rag! or, indeed, any weight at all. The omission is technically significant, for
it is beyond the physical capacity of an archer to draw a hand bow weighing 407
lb., the avoirdupois equivalent of roo Syrian rat/s of the period in
question. Even when modified in the manner described, the weapon would almost
certainly have been far too heavy for drawing with anything as simple as the
belt-and-claw, though it could have been drawn with relative ease by certain
forms of mechanism. Since our author is not given to inaccuracies of the order
involved in this instance, we can only conclude either that this

portion of the treatise is not his work or that 100 razis is a figurative
expression for ‘the heaviest possible’ (cf. English ‘a ton weight’), the
qualification ‘Syrian weight’ being an insertion by another hand. The second of
these alternatives is quite feasible if account be taken of (a) the fact that
the renowned Tahir al-Balkhi is said to haye assigned to the heaviest bow a
weight of 100 ratis (above, p. 30), which by the Khorasanian standard of the
twelfth century, would amount to no more than 89 lb., and (b) the fact that in
no MS of the B group does the qualification ‘Syrian weight’ occur, While the
first possibility can by no means be excluded, we are neverthe- less reluctant
to dismiss this whole section as the work of a different author since in A!
there is

606
was redrafted and edited, Whatever the truth of the matter, we can at least be
certain that, if we discount what is said about weight, the technical
information contained in our chapter is valid for the last quarter of the
fourteenth century and is for this reason worthy of explanatory


lugs which were then left at the top of the cylinder (Fig. 4). The trigger
engaged in a recess cut into the underside of the nut, and it was usually held
in this position by a spring. Details of oe mechanisms may be found in the works
of Payne-Gallwey and Giorgetti (see Biblio- graphy). |

607When the sere of the trigger was disengaged from the nut, the pull of the string
caused the latter to revolve on its spindle in the forward direction, leaving
the tail projecting above the stock.  In the case of modern crossbows or older
weapons in good working order the string, when re- drawn, travels along the
surface of the stock until it reaches and presses against the tail of the nut.


trigger automatically re-engages under pressure of a spring and locks the nut in
position ready for another shot,

608
Though such mechanism may seem simple, it is interesting that in Mameluke Syria
of the


UIN OFIVUUL LING AMD OLINAYE VAUVOJA W Dini A4 MZ ANS ALAPZARNAOAN OY

609
fourteenth century the nut had to be reset by hand before the string was drawn
back and hooked behind the two lugs, This meant that for the last few inches of
the draw the string had to leave the surface of the stock to be lifted over the
nut, which is a slightly more difficult operation than that described above.

It may well be that manual resetting was merely an intelligent safety precaution
to ensure that the nut really had engaged with the trigger before it received
the load of the drawn bowstring.  To speed the reloading operation a reliable
self-cocking mechanism is obviously a great asset, but our author’s meagre
description does not indicate how he achieved this or why this feature was
absent in the usual types of bow. Perhaps they lacked a spring to enable the
trigger to engage in the nut.

610The dangers of the usual weapon referred to in our text might, basically, be
two. Firstly, because the nut had to be reset by hand, the direction of traction
on the string as it was drawn back had to be altered just as it was coming under
maximum tension. This would have made the bow more difficult to control at that
moment and, if the stock should slip from the grasp in any way, the results
could be most unpleasant. Furthermore, as the string left the stock one of the
hooks of the claw could get behind one of the lugs of the nut, which would have
made it very difficult, if not impossible, to seat the string correctly before
disenpaging the claw. The whole operation would then have had to be
restarted. Secondly, if the trigger mechanism wäs unreliable, there would have
been the danger of the string's being accidentally released. With the archer off
his guard, and his hand in the way, he could suffer severe injury. This
eventuality could arise from the lack of a spring to secure the trigger which
would, under such circumstances, be a ‘hair’ tigger apt to release the nut at
the slightest touch.

Our author's mention of a device fitted over the nut to hold the bolt in place
is of interest.  A horn spring for this purpose is not mentioned by
Payne-Gallwey until he deals with mechanisms of the sixteenth century (Crossbow,
pp. 170-72). The advantage of such a fitting to the horse-archer is
obvious. Without it he would have to hold the loaded bolt in position with his
thumb on the top of the stock until he was ready to shoot, otherwise the bolt
would be liable to fall from the bow at any time.

611Generally speaking, the crossbow is not a good weapon for a horseman as it is
both cumber- some and slow in operation as compared with the hand bow. As our
author so rightly points out when dealing with bows, they are not well suited to
cavalry operations. One is inclined to wonder if ail the contents of this
chapter are, in fact, intended to apply to the horse-archer at all, Although we
have examined many hundreds of miniature paintings from the Middle East, we have
not scen one showing a crossbow carried or used by a horseman.


CHAPTER 17 ON BRACING THE BOW (ITAR AL-QAWS)

612
Some masters in the art of shooting maintain that bracing the bow is a
fundamental, while others consider it a secondary basis of archery. The former
hold that any archer who is not proficient in bracing is incompetent, and in
their eyes he is not a complete archer.

A bow may be braced in quite a number of ways, but here we shall confine our
attention to the most useful,

613
A military method

The following procedure is a military technique. Grasp the prip of your bow with
your left hand in such a way that you have the back, as opposed to the belly,
which will be the side nearer to the string "when the bow is braced!,! facing
you.? You put the nock? under the fourth tos of your left foot to prevent the
loop of the string from slipping out when the bow is flexed ("inda n-naz’) for
bracing. The fourth toe and little toe must then be wrapped over the loop and
tensed.  At this point a very good tip must be noted: the archer can always
secure the loop of his string to the nock ‘of the lower siyah? with a piece of
thread to keep it from slipping out when bracing.  Your next step is to plant
your right leg in an upright supporting position (between the bow and its
string). This done, quickly and firmly set the belly of the arm (yad) of your
bow—in other words, its longer half (sic), or upper limb, which is termed the
‘shooting limb’ (bayt ar-ramy)* and which is the section between the siyah and
the grip—on to your right knee at a point close to the grip with the string
resting on your calf. Now apply pressure to the bow with the palm of your right
hand, holding the loop of the string in the ends of your fingers. The way to do
this is first to grasp the grip of the bow with your left hand and the lower
part of the upper siyah and the string with the right, the knot of the loop
being heid in position between the right index finger and middle finger. You
then grasp the middle of the sides of the loop with the ends of the index finger
and thumb and apply pressure to the bow with the front of the right palm as you
tense the right knee and left leg, at the same time pulling the left hand and
grip towards you and pushing with the heel of the right hand until the loop
slips into the nock in the siyah. Keep hold of the upper siyah and the loop of
the bowstring to guard against the danger of the siyah’s springing round into
its unbraced position (ingilab), for if one is in too much of a hurry to take
his hand off the neck of a bow, it may, if too flexible or in any way twisted,
spring round and perhaps break, doing harm, in any event, to the archer, Once
the loop has been slipped into the nock in the siyah, the whole hand should be
used to maintain a tight hold on them both until it is quite certain that they
are properly in place and that the siyah has settled. Then the archer— whose
hand ought never at any stage to have left the grip—should turn the bow with
both hands, take the szyak of the lower limb in his right with the string
towards his face, and examine the bow.  Should he find it to be out of true or
twisted, he should correct it.

614Once the bow is braced, the necks should be adjusted and pressure applied to the
stronger limb until the archer thinks the bow is as it should be.!*. Then,
‘grasping the bow with his left


go

615
ON BRACING THE BOW 9I


band, as previously described,! he should take the centre of the string in all
fingers of his right, and, if the bow is stable and not very much older than the
string, draw it." If, on the other hand, the bow is much older than the stríng,
or is twisted, or displays some characteristic that will be detrimental to it
"when drawn!, he should leave it to settle to the string and later test it by
draw- ing gently to see whether the necks have settled and whether the string is
right for its draw- weight? or not. All tests of this kind, of course, are
applicable only if the archer finds the bow to be true. Should he detect some
twist in it, on the other hand, he should draw it only after adjusting it and
leaving it for a while to settle.” If the twist is quite marked, he should defer
bracing? until he has heated his bow on all sides over a gentle flame with the
application of

616
^ e : :1


M NK d RM

617
FIG. 31. BRACING: MILITARY METHOD


rather more heat to the concave surface (batn) of the distortion and the belly
(wajh) of the bow.  It should then be gently and lightly pressed into shape in a
former (galab). To do this calls for dexterity, deftness, and technical skill,
and great care must be taken to ensure that the bow neither springs round nor
gets burned. How to correct a bow in this way is something every archer should
know really well and be determined to master; for it is a great fundamental and
an accom- plishment that none can aiford to ignore since a bow is prone to
distortion and must be constantly watched. Care of this kind will keep a bow in
condition and prolong its life. Sound shooting cannot be achieved with a bow
that is not itself sound. Any archer, therefore, who cannot brace his bow
properly and correct any irregular curves it may develop is incompetent,
contemptible, unenterprising, and wholly unworthy of the name of archer.

618
Bracing on horseback

To brace a bow on horseback while charging "or wheeling!,!! grasp your bow as
described in the preceding section, but bring it in against the horse’s
neck. More precisely, set the neck of the lower limb against the base of the
animal’s neck at the juncture of its neck and chest. The rest of the procedure
is as already indicated in the last section.***

619If you wish to try a different method, lodge the neck of your bow quickly but
securely in the instep of the right foot with the string in place and the grip
pressed firmly against the outside of the right knee. Next bring your right hand
to bear on the neck of the bow, that is to say, the base of the siyah and, with
your left, draw the string up until you can slip it into the nock.


92 SAKACEN AKUCHERY

620
In other words, you put the lower siyah of the bow under the sole of your right
foot, hold the upper styah with your right hand and the string with your left,
and complete the operation in the manner described. If you wish to brace on the
left side, the method is the same (mutatis mutandis),

By another method you can use your right hand to take hold of the neck to which
the string has been fixed and hold the loop between your teeth.

621



622FIG. 32. BRACING ON HORSEBACK


Bracing under peaceful conditions In combat the few methods of bracing mentioned
so far!* will be found by cavalry and infantry (as the case may be) to be the
best, the most practicable, and the easiest to use. Under safer and more
leisurely conditions, on the other hand, one good way of bracing is to sit
cross-legged, putting the right leg inside the left. Seated squarely in this
position, the archer fixes the loop of

623
in the nock of one of the styahs, but this time gives the free loop to someone
near at hand. Taking the necks of the bow in both hands, he places the centre of
the grip beneath his right knee!^* or, "better still,’ in behind both knees, and
proceeds to flex the bow with both hands together. He then tells the person
holding the free loop to slip it into the nock (Fig. 34). This done, he parts
his legs inside the bow (thereby bringing his thighs to bear on the dustars) and
sets the styahs as truly as he can, What he should do is to look at the stronger
limb of his bow (i.e. the lower,


ON BRACING THE BOW ya

624
FIG. 33. BRACING IN SQUATTING POSITION


which is liable to bend less than the upper) and put more thigh against it, at
the same time easing the thigh which is pressed against his weaker limb, 'but at
no time allowing his hands to leave either neck!.*? He sits in this position for
quite some time until he feels sure that the bow has settled. He then removes
one thigh and looks, and, if he thinks that the bow has in fact settled, he may
take out the other. If it has not, however, he should replace his thigh (and
wait until it has).

625'This method of bracing is most suitable for bows that are apt to quiver and
spin round and in cases where the bow is a good deal older than its string, It
is also better for the bow. By applying this technique an intelligent man can
bring his bow to the required curve without a bracing- board (kharkumán) either
because he wishes to display his skill and knowledge or because the want of a
bracing-board leaves him no alternative (Fig. 35).

A useful piece of equipment for bracing purposes is the barshag,!* which is a
strap or cord with which the string is held fast to the weaker limb. "Two may be
needed for one bow according to the requirements of the case.!!* If the bow, for
instance, is a self bow and there is danger of one of the limbs giving way, a
barshag should be applied to each limb to hold it in check.

626
P


iS

627



628


FIG, 34. BRACING WITH AN ASSISTANT

629
94 SARACEN ARCHERY


A knowledge of things of this kind should be regarded by an archer as a sort of
religious obligation because of the frequency with which the need to apply it
will arise in combat and on campaign.

630Where one limb of a bow is weaker than the other, the stronger of the two should
be heated over a gentle fire. If no fire is available, the archer should put his
hand around it and briskly rub it up and down for a time until it gets warm, If
fon campaign!!5 in winter when the weather is cold, his best policy is to put
the bow inside his clothes and warm it with his body. When going to bed at
night, he should also keep the bow inside his clothes to protect it against the
damp.

When on campaign, an archer should never neglect his bow for a single moment,
and in extremes of temperature he should inspect it ‘day and night, hour by
hour, and not let it out of his mind, even though he be absolutely certain that
it is stable and true, ° Moreover, he should Protect his hands against the cold
in the early morning lest, needing to shoot, his limbs and fingers fail to
respond, leaving him unable to shoot at all or, if able to do so, unable to
equal his usual performance, This is a rule which should not be ignored, for ‘he
who neglects to do what he ought, may repent when repentance will avail him
not’,

631



632Fic. 35. A BRACING-BOARD (Kharkuman?)


Bracing a stiff bow

633The way to brace a stiff bow is to take the upper siyah with your right hand
and, in a standing position, to place your right leg in between the bow and the
string, keeping the bowstring on top of your shin and the belly of the bow
against the rear of your right thigh beneath the hip- joint. You then put the
tip of the lower siyak against the front of your left leg and, with your right
hand on the upper siyah and your left hand holding the loop of the string, you
push your right hand forward. You may, alternatively, hold the neck of the bow
with your left hand, place the lower siyah against the front of your right leg,
and, putting your left leg between the bow and the string, push with the left
hand as you hold the loop in your right.

If the bow is too strong to be braced in this way, you should use a broad strap
two cubits long and four fingers wide (about 4 ft. 4 in. x 3 in.). To the ends
of this you fit two loops made of either bowstring or leather of the same sort
as your string's chafing protector (saysarah).*° You next put the strap behind
your back as you would when drawing a stirrup crossbow. If the bow has two nocks
in each siyah, you put one loop in each nock., If your bow is not so made,
however, you can have two hooks on your drawing-strap instead of two loops, or
else secure the loops to the siyalis. Then, drawing with your waist, you push
with your feet Tagainst the centre of the bow’s grip! ?! and attach the
string. There is no need to enlarge on a subject which can be dismissed briefly
once the gist is grasped. i

634
On bracing a bow in water .

To brace in water, you put your head between the string and the bow with the
bow’s grip on your shoulder ‘at the nape of your neck??? and each loop of string
positioned in the centre of each neck, With a hand on each loop and neck you
apply pressure with both palms together until the loops fall into the nocks in
your styahs. Alternatively, you may hold each neck with your hands,

635
ON BRACING THE BOW 95



636

Fic. 36. BRACING A STIFF Bow

637



638FIG. 37. BRACING WITH A DRAWING-STRAP


96 SARACEN ARCHERY

639
having one loop fixed in the bow and the other in your mouth, and then bend the
bow with your hands until you get the nock which is in its siyak into the loop
that is m your mouth. This requires a good deal of practice, but it is one of
the finer points of bowmanship. If you propose to shoot, you hold your bow
crosswise and use it in that position.


COMMENT

640
Bracing the highly reflexed Oriental bow can be difficult. Roughly C-shaped when
unstrung, the weapon must be completely reversed for this purpose, As already
noted in the introduction, the increased tension resulting from reversal adds
considerably to the ultimate power and efficiency of such bows.

Although reflexed composites will tolerate a surprising degree of flexure, any
unfair stress or strain can easily result in breakage, and for this reason
bracing demands great care, The object of any method is to exert equal pressure
on the two siyahs as the grip is forced in the opposite direction. i

641
I. Ways of Bracing s


So far as can be judged from Middle Eastern sources consulted by us, the ways of
bracing a composite bow were far more numerous than our text might lead us to
suppose. It was asserted by some authors that there were no less than one
hundred, and a certain Muhammad ibn al- Hasan al-Harawi even wrote a work in
which he described one hundred and twenty—imost of which, however, are said to
have been repetitious and useless (Arab Archery, p. 29). While not proposing to
follow al-Harawi's example, we nevertheless venture to illustrate the point by
mentioning some methods not indicated in the preceding chapter. For convenience
let us begin by comparing our ten with the twelve methods indicated in Arab
Archery (pp. 30-37). These may be summarized as follows:

642
I. Pressure bracing (i). This is identical with Taybugha’s military method.

2. Pressure bracing (ii). The only difference between this and the preceding is
that no extra support is given by the knee,

6433. Concealed bracing. This can be used by a bowman either on horseback or on
foot. The lower siyah is placed against the outside of the thigh with the back
of the bow towards the archer. With one hand he pulls the grip towards him and
with the other pushes the upper siyah away from him. It is termed ‘concealed’
because the aim is to prevent an enemy on the side of the archer opposite to
that on which he is bracing from observing his action. It may, of course, be
carried out on either side.

4. Bracing of the fleeing archer. In this an archer facing a sword- or
lance-thrust flees and, while running, braces his bow, its back towards him, by
striking the ground with the lower siyah, pulling the grip with the left hand
and pushing the upper siyah with the other, Alternatively, he may grasp the bow
with its belly towards him and the lower siyah lying between his feet, In this
case the grip is pushed forward with the left hand, and the neck of the upper
limb pulled towards him. The first method is quicker, but the second better for
the safety of the bow, As a bow can easily be broken by cither, we have not put
it to the test.

6445. Bracing of the wounded archer. This is almost identical with Taybugha's first
method of bracing a stiff bow, but only one hand need be used, the supposition
being that the archer’s other hand or arm is out of action. The string is set in
the lower nock, and the other loop around the upper neck of the bow as in the
case of pressure bracing. The one hand then bends the bow and slides the loop
into the upper nock. The archer shoots with one hand as he lies on his back,
holding the grip between his feet.


IO.

645
12.


ON BRACING THE BOW 97

646
. Water bracing. This is virtually the same as one of the methods given by
Taybugha.  . Sleeve bracing. The bow is slipped up the right sleeve—obviously
ample—and brought out


through the left fully braced. Unfortunately, detailed instructions are not
given.

647
. Bracing of the archers. This is the same as the method mentioned by Taybugha
in which the


archer has an assistant to slip on the string.

648
. Bracing of the lone archer. This is the same, but the archer fits the string
himself by flexing


the bow against one knee with both hands. He then holds one siyah in place with
the other knee. The other siyah is held with one hand, while the opposite hand
fits the loop into the nock.

649The bow is flexed across the back. The lower siyah goes between the legs and is
held at the base of the thigh. One hand then pulls down on the upper siyah, and
the other slips in the


string.  - The archer kneels on the left knee and stretches out his right
leg. One siyah is set on the left

650
knee, the grip goes under the right leg, and the other siyah is pulled up with
the hand.  The grip is taken in both hands and the siyaks pushed away with the
two feet. The free loop is slid along by the appropriate foot until it slips
into the nock,


One method to which there is no reference in our text, but which is described in
MSS of the B group, is worthy of mention—due account being taken of some evident
confusion between right and left. Holding one neck of the bow with its loop in
place, the archer takes the other loop between his teeth. Passing the bow
between his thighs, he Jodges it beneath the left and applies his left hand to
the neck that is free, firmly setting the neck in his right hand on the right
thigh, The neck once steadily in place on that thigh, the archer takes the loop
from his teeth with the right hand, exerts pressure with the left, and slips the
string in the nock located in the neck that is pressed against the left
thigh. The great advantage of this method is stated to lie in the fact that the
archer may put a stronger limb beneath his thigh to reduce its strength and in
this way balance the two limbs, albeit after several attempts. The method could
also be used by a horseman (B!, 60b-61a; B*, 49a-b).

651



652Fic. 38, BRACING


Assyrian archer bracing his bow with the aid of an assistant. From fragment of a
relief from Ashurbanipal’s palace (c. 668-630 8.C.). British Museum.

653
TADA


98 SARACEN ARCHERY

654
For further information on methods of bracing the European reader unfamiliar
with Arabic, Persian, or Turkish, would do well to consult Hein, /s/., XV,
pp. 54-60 and Klopsteg, pp. 86-90.


2. The Relative Ages of Bow and String

655
When referring to the age of a bow in relation to its suing, Taybughà may have
in mind either the fitting of a completely new string to a bow or the changing
of a used string from one bow to another, In a new string there is usually a
small degree of stretch to be removed. Normally this should come out within a
few seconds of fitting it to the braced bow, which should then be care- fully
watched lest a little too much stretch render it unstable. Should this happen,
the string should be removed and shortened by adjustment of the loop-knots so
that when it is fully stretched the length will be correct. Slightly more
stretch can be expected to occur during the first few shots, after which the
string should settle and no more adjustment be needed.

It will be recalled that the bracing height, or distance between the grip and
the string of a braced bow, must be constant (above, p. 23). A small variation
will affect both range and the direction in which the arrow leaves the
bow. Slight though the effect may be, it is nevertheless sufficient to impair
the.accuracy of the shot, and close attention is needed until the string is
fully stretched and has been ‘shot in’, Since some stretch results from the
tightening of newly tied loop knots, even a well-stretched string transferred
from one bow to another might give a little if the loop-knots required
adjustment as a result of difference in length between the two bows concerned.

656



657uem FIG. 39. BRACING Scythian archer bracing his bow. From 2 silver bowl,
Hermitage Museum, Leningrad.  (After Balfour, JRAI.)


3. Aids to Bracing

658
(a) Kharkuman. We do not know the exact form of this device, but there is almost
no doubt that it was a bracing-board. The term is a loan word from the Persian
compound Akar +kamān.  The latter presents no difficulty; it is the regular word
for ‘bow’. The former has several meanings of which the most apt in this
instance would appear to be ‘a bridge’ as for a stringed instrument.  The
bracing device would consist of a board with a bridge, or central upright
support, which


ON BRACING THE BOW 99

659
would be at right angles to the grip of the bow when raised in bracing. As can
be seen from Fig. 35, in which we illustrate the general principle, the effect
is comparable to that of a bridge raising the strings of a musical
instrument. The support would be absolutely rigid and the top padded to avoid
damage to the grip. Such a device could not be carried around by an archer, but
it would be reasonable to expect its inclusion in the equipment of
baggage-trains, arsenals, and bowyers’ workshops.

(b) Barshag, This term—also from Persian—appears to denote an appliance
amounting to little more than a kind of binding to secure the string to the
styak. It is defined in a, 66a, as ‘a strap or cord about one and a half spans
(about 11 in.) in length. Once it was tied at the ends, the bow could be
inserted, the purpose being to hold the weak limb’. The exact details of its
application are uncertain, but it seems from this description to have been a
kind of loop which could be slipped over the styah and tightened in some way.

660If one limb of a bow were unstable, there would be some advantage in securing
the string to that limb for the purpose of bracing and retaining it until the
bow settled. It could be that the barshag was so used, and that upon its removal
the bow was immediately fit for use. Alternatively, it might have been applied
and left awhile to correct a fault when it would have been inopportune to light
a fire to remove some slight distortion by the application of heat.

A number of devices for correcting faults in bows are known to have existed, but
here is not the place to accord them the space that would be required by a
detailed discussion.

661
4. Defects in a Bow


Of the two major defects thar bracing may reveal, the first is weakness in the
neck. Because of the form and shape of the bow, the neck has a natural tendency
to lateral displacement. Its inherent stiffness normally militates against this,
but if any weakness develops, it can occur. At best there will be slight lateral
displacement of the neck so that its mid-line will not lie in the same plane as
that of the string. When a braced bow is sighted from one end to the other, the
string should appear to bisect the bow along its entire length. If, however, the
neck is displaced it will not do so. Should side-warping of this kind not be
detected and the bow be drawn, the defective limb will be subjected to a most
severe twisting strain and possibly break.

662If the worst happens, the neck will twist violently round when the bow is
braced, the string will slip past it, and the bow spring back to its unbraced
form or capsize. Apart from the risk of damage to the bow, such an occurrence
can have unpleasant consequences for the user, who may be struck with some force
by one of the siyahs as it flies back. Hence the warnings given by our author to
the archer to keep a firm grip on the bow until he is sure it is stable and has
settled to the string.


5. Heat Treatment of Bows

663
Once a twist has developed in the limb of a bow, it may force the neck out of
line with the results already described, and even if it does not do so, unfair
strain will be thrown on to the bow.  Before bracing a composite bow, the archer
should therefore assure himself of its soundness in this respect. To test it, he
should hold it by one of its ends and align the two styahs. If, when viewed from
end to end, they are in the same plane, the bow may be braced. If, on the other
hand, they appear to cross each other, the defect must first be remedied,

Provided that the distortion is not excessive, correction presents little
difficulty. After careful examination to decide the exact point of distortion
the offending section is thoroughly warmed.  For this purpose there is nothing
better than an open fire, and a dull charcoal fire is especially suitable
(cf. Klopsteg, p. 89). The process is slow and gradual. Back and belly are
alternately exposed to the fire for about half an hour until a pervasive
warmth—not hotness—is achieved.  When subjected to such treatment, the materials
become relatively pliable, and a firm correcting

664
100 SARACEN ARCHERY


twist may then be applied. To permit the bow to cool completely, an hour should
be allowed, after which it can be re-examined. If it is stili not true, the
process must be patiently repeated until it is.

665The curvature of the two limbs can be balanced in the same way. If imbalance.is
present and cannot be corrected by the simple application of pressure after
bracing, the stiffer limb must be warmed before bracing. The amount of heat
required and the time allowed for the bow to warm are largely a matter of
judgement based on experience, but with a little practice the technique is not
difficult to master.


6. The Mould

666
If the distortion in a bow is excessive, it may not be possible to remedy the
defect simply by heat and manipulation, and in these circumstances one has to
resort to more forcible means such as the use of a mould. We do not know the
nature of the mould used by the Mamelukes, bur, whatever its form, such a device
would only be found in a baggage-train, arsenal, or craftsman's workshop. One
kind of mould with which we are familiar is the Ottoman destgah, of which a line
drawing may be seen in Hein, Fs}, XIV, p. 344 or Klopsteg, p. 52. Basically, it
is a board in which a number of slots are cut to grip different parts of the
bow. The bow would be warmed as for simple heat treatment, and the offending
section placed in the appropriate slot. The archer or bowyer could then apply a
very strong twist, which, as our author points out, must nevertheless be done
carefully and adroitly. Whatever the form of mould used by the Mamelukes, the
principle must have been the same as that of the destgdh, even though the device
itself may have been more or less elaborate, There is a suggestion in our text
that heat may have been applied while the bow was in the mould as the archer is
warned not to burn the bow. This could be taken to imply that the bow was
strapped to the mould after the application of a correcting twist, then heated
rather more strongly, allowed to cool in the mould, and finally removed,

One would have thought that work of this kind was more a task for a craftsman
than an archer.  It is interesting, therefore, that Taybughà expects the archer
to be able to do it himself.

667
CHAPTER 18 ON STANDING BEFORE THE TARGET


A standing position (giyám) will afford the archer a greater degree of stability
than can be achieved by squatting, and it has the additional advantage of being
easier for the learner. There are four kinds of stance lof which three are
designed for target shooting and vary accordingly as the archer!’ stands
squarely to the mark (mutawajjih kathir^") or in a position of acute obliquencss
(munharif shadid?*) or in an intermediate position (snutawassiz) between these
two extremes (Fig. 45). Lastly, there is a stance to suit the archer’s needs in
combat and flight shooting.

668A learner should take up a slightly oblique stance before the mark and set the
latter in line with his left eye. Keeping his left knee straight and pointing
the toes of his left foot directly towards the mark, he should plant his right
foot in a transverse position with the left heel pointing in the direction of
his right instep (bayád). With sufficient space between his two feet to accom-
modate the length of the bone of the forearm he should put his weight ( ya'
tamid) on the right foot and ease (yukhiff) his left.

Using an alternative method, he can place the left foot in a transverse position
so that its little toe is opposite the mark and plant the right foot lengthwise
with its big toe pointing directly at the mark.

669"There is yet another method. In this case the archer sets the mark" in line
with his left shoulder and stands with both feet firmly planted in the
transverse position. There should be no great gap between the two feet—only a
span, or even less than that. This is Tahir’s method.


The Military Stance?

670
In this position the archer has his Achilles’ tendons meeting, but parts his
feet in front. He stands in this way because he is wearing armour. It is a
difficult thing to do, "and I do not care for it’, but I record it here in
accordance with the practice of our masters, My own view is that the archer
should put a space between his legs almost big enough to allow another man to
pass between. In this way he can stand more firmly and can get up, stand, and
dodge? more rapidly.

In battle you can put your shield over your forearm, fasten it to it, and
advance on the enemy sideways. When you eventually reach the spot where his
arrows are falling, you drop on your knees with head down and hands on the
ground and rotate your shield‘ over your head so that if the enemy shoots at
you, none of his arrows will hit you. If one should hit, it will strike your
shield.  If you are able to shoot at the enemy and so wish, you can nock and
draw in that position without casting so much as a glance at him before bringing
the arrow to full draw. You then raise your head, sight, and shoot. This is a
very convenient manœuvre when one is engaged in siege opera- tions against
fortresses, cities, and the like. à

671
IOI


102 SARACEN ARCHERY COMMENT

672
Strict adherence to the Arabic text would require our chapter to be entitled ‘On
Standing and Sitting Before the Target’, but, as none of the MSS of the A group
deals with the second of these two subjects, we have excluded ‘and Sitting’ from
our English title. The subject will be taken up in section 2 below.


1. Standing

673
The oblique, frontal, and intermediate positions are discussed in Arab Archery,
pp. 81-84, where they are said to have been the positions of Abū Hashim, Tahir,
and Ishaq, respectively:

(a) The position of acute obliqueness, Known in Great Britain and the United
States as the sideways position, this is quite rightly said to permit a longer
and more powerful draw. The bow arm can be fully extended, and the unrestricted
use of the back- and shoulder-muscles permits the application of maximum
strength. It enabled the oriental archer discharging his arrow from the right of
his bow to hold a shield while shooting. This important advantage resulting from
the use of the thumb-lock would be denied to users of the three-finger method as
practised in the West, for the arrow leaving the bow from the [eft would have to
pass between bow and shield with resulting interference from the latter. To
shoot with a shield was perhaps not as simple for the Oriental as one might
suppose. Of the various types of shield in use in the Middle Ages, that most
current in the area with which are concerned was too deeply concave on the
inside to permit both the grip of the shield and the handle of the bow to be
held in one hand without some kind of supporting device. To overcome the
difficulty, the archer's most practical approach would have been to slide his
forearm through the shield's grip and to support it by means of a shield-strap,
or guige. This would have been fastened to two of the four rings which one
normally finds inside the boss and then hung around the neck to afford
additional Support against the rim. The guige need have been nothing more than a
silk scarf. Such an expedient was used by mounted warriors as a means of
carrying a shield when not in use. (For helpful advice in this matter we are
indebted to H. R. Robinson of H.M. Tower of London Armouries.)

674(b) The frontal position. The advantages of this position were said by its
advocates to lie in increased accuracy and the fact that it permitted the user
to wear a coat or two of mail which would crowd the tip of the bow if shot in
the oblique position, Although the author of Arab Archery concedes its merits
for a near target, trick-shooting, and weak bows, he warns his readers that it
will shorten one’s draw, weaken one’s shot, and not allow the use of a shield.

(c) The intermediate position. This is said to combine the advantages of the
other two without having the disadvantages of either. It is advocated as the
best standing position for warfare and

675
other purposes, 2. Sitting

In the terminology of Arabic-speaking archers ‘sitting’ (julüs) seems to denote
almost any posture that is not standing or lying, In many contexts it is best
translated as ‘squatting’.

676As in the case of standing, the positions could be oblique, frontal, or
intermediate. Four different seats are described in the chapter on sighting in
MSS of the -C group (C!, 482-b; C?, 78b-79a; C*, 40a-b; cf. D1, 36a; D?,
62a). They are:

(a) The sprinter's seat (jalsat al-hárib). The archer bends his right knee, digs
it into the ground to take his weight (D: and sits on his foot). His left shank
he keeps erect (D: but bent slightly over to the right). It is Abii Hashim’s
method and was that of most of the ancients and the Persians. It may be used the
opposite way round, It is a good position that is suitable for users of a strong
bow or novices.

677
ON STANDING BEFORE THE TARGET 103


(b) The fencer’s seat (jalsat al-muthàgif). The archer rests on his ieft shank
which is raised but with the knee pointing towards the ground. He keeps his
right erect. The feet are kept apart the length of the bone of the forearm or
less, and his weight is distributed between the two.

678(c) Innominate. The archer squáts on his raised feet, ankles together. The
shanks remain erect. It is suitable for persons with deep chests or persons
using the oblique position. Most archers use it, and it is convenient for a man
in armour,

(d) The kings’ seat (jalsa al-mulük). This is described as a ‘square seat’
(jalsah murabba'ah), meaning that the user is square to the target and not
sideways. It could, perhaps, mean *cross- legged’—as interpreted, it would seem,
in Arab Archery, p. 85. It is suitable for men with deep chests, for
trick-shooting, and for use with a light bow.

679The foregoing postures are described in more or less the same terms by the
author of Arab Archery, who interestingly remarks that (c) was used by most
archers in Khorasan and Egypt, and that (b) was the posture adopted by most
Andalusian archers (pp. 84-85).


CHAPTER 19

680
ON FLIGHT SHOOTING (RAMY AS-SIBAQ ‘ALA BU'D AL-MASAFAH)


If, in shooting, it is your wish to outdistance your competitors you should use
a bow with short dustérs and choose a light arrow. It has already been remarked
(above, p. 8) that flight bows should have short dustars or, in other words, be
shorter in the working limbs than ordinary bows, have long necks, and be quick
to recover (sari'at ar-rujit')* upon removal of the string (Le. have greater
resilience than the ordinary bow). Enough, too, has already been said about the
kind of arrows to be used. We need only add that the lighter the arrow, the
greater its range. The lightest flight arrows in our experience weigh six
dirhams (285° 6 gr.). They break easily and can only be used by really
first-class bowmen, for if the archer, in locking, subjects an arrow of this
kind to pressure, or if, upon loosing, he tilts the top of his bow or twists the
grip, he will break it. Flight shooting, in fact, clearly demonstrates whether
an archer knows his business or not, and shows up his proficiency or
incompetence in the art of bowmanship.

681It is generally agreed that in flight shooting you should keep the sun and wind
behind you and stand obliquely with legs apart, Stand on your right leg, all the
time keeping the left at ease, for although both legs have a part in the stance,
it is the right that should take the weight as the left is held at ease ‘from
the moment the draw begins until the loose is actually completed!.? It is a good
idea, therefore, to put your left foot up on to a stone or something that will
serve the same


purpose.

682‘The moment he begins to draw? the flight shooter should tilt the foot of his
bow forwards and bring up his bow-hand until he reaches the point where half the
sky is exactly halved. In other words, he should find the point of elevation
that lies half-way between the zenith and the horizon; for if the hand is raised
beyond or below that point, some loss of range will result.  Great care must
therefore be taken to determine the right elevation and to set the bow at the
correct angle. For precise reckoning the archer should take an elevated object
of the appropriate height or a spot of the same altitude and use it as a
guide.**

Given a perfect draw and loose, you will succeed in outstripping other
competitors and take the prize if you follow my advice. Instructions relating to
the draw and loose have already been given. It remains only to note that the
greater the draw, the greater the distance attained.

683For perfect flight performance the archer should lock the arrow without exerting
pressure on any part of the nock and, having drawn with true alignment ‘of arms,
shoulders, fists, and shaft!  as fully as the ‘greater draw’ (wafa’ nihdyah)
permits, loose with a rapid snatch and twist accom- panied by a ‘forward’ and
upward thrust ‘against the grip’ as he spreads his chest and arms.  Some flight
shooters move forward a little and release while still in motion, accompanying
the action with a hard stamp of the left foot. This technique is a great asset
to anyone who can train himself to it and really carry out our instructions in
the proper manner. !It will, however, thoroughly discredit a man if he doesn't
know how to apply it correctly and will result in a poor distance. The real art
lies in having a fully drawn arrow at the moment of loosing and simul-


104

684
ON FLIGHT SHOOTING 105


taneously timing the actions of stamping, chest expansion, and inspiration to
coincide with the departure of the arrow from its true nocking-point at the base
of the thumb-lock. The slightest deviation from this ideal will result in a bad
shot.!*

685Certain advantages are to be derived from flight shooting. For instance, it
teaches an archer not only to appreciate the significance of atmospheric
conditions, but also to draw a taut bow and develop a sharp, clean loose.*
Furthermore he wil! learn to attain maximum range and effective- ness, which is
what is wanted in warfare, especially when it comes to siege operations. It
does, on the other hand, have its drawbacks in that it can reduce his degree of
accuracy and precision in shooting, impair good grouping (jam), increase his
expenditure and debt, and bequeath a legacy of enmity between archers and their
nearest and dearest."

Among the most cunning tricks that can be played when shooting flight arrows is
one in which the archer drills a hole through the shaft near the fletching and
plugs the hole when making his own shot, but clears it when it is his opponent’s
turn to shoot. Another trick is to drill down the centre of the shaft from
inside the nock and to leave the hole open when shooting himself, but to fill it
with a metal plug when it is his opponent's turn. These tricks, of course, can
only be played when it is stipulated that the shooting be done with one bow and
one arrow. The use of such practices makes the acceptance of any prize illegal
because it is cheating and not permitted by the

686-Jaw.* An impertinent, hard-faced, and impudent character, however, can use such
means to great effect without the application of any great skill.

The subject of sharp practices puts me in mind of the story of a Persian archer
in Khwarizm (or, Khwarazm; Kharezm) whose story is as follows. ‘I had heard’, he
said, ‘that an archer in Nishapur was shooting short flight arrows, so I went
out and spent several days looking for him.”  In the course of the search he
suddenly came upon a man on horseback carrying a bowcase containing a bow and
arrows. ‘So we sat talking,’ he went on, ‘and the time for the mid-day prayer
came round, so the man got up to perform his ablution before prayer.” When he
had gone I took a look inside the man’s bowcase and was surprised to find that
it contained some flight arrows measuring about six and a half fists (gabdahs;
i.e. about 21 in.) in length. Two fists were of reed (gasab), two of khalanj
wood (Cornelian Cherry?), two of brazil-wood (baggam), and the remaining half
fist of yamir, or ibex horn. Having looked at them, I put them back and then
found that there was also an arrow-guide (mjrat) with them. When the man
returned, I remarked “I suppose you are good at shooting short flight arrows?"
“Yes,” he replied, “with the aid of an arrow-guide (majrd).” He then showed me
his bow, and I found two beads of lead on his bow- string. “Shall I do you a
good turn?" I asked. “Since you are so kind,” he replied. So I said, “Let me
then give you these twenty dinars and this nag 'in exchange for your equipment’
and you will return safe and sound, for I pity you arriving in Khw4rizm with
this collection of tackle!  They will be up in arms against you and really put
you through it.” Whereupon he agreed to my suggestion and was delighted with
me.’

687This story is clear enough to require no long explanation. We shail come back to
that later.


COMMENT 1. Flight Shooting: General Considerations

688
Flight shooting is a sport in which the archer strives for maximum distance,
accuracy being of minor importance, Maximum distance depends on the design of
the arrow and its attainment of maximum initial velocity. The latter is, in
turn, dependent upon the highest rate of recovery of which the flight shooter’s
bow is capable. Rate of recovery, i.e. the relative speed with which the bow’s
limbs spring back to assume the form that they had before the commencement of
the draw, can, as Taybugha correctly observes, be increased by shortening the
working part of the limb, The point can be simply illustrated: if a short stick
is bent and allowed to fly back, it will


106 SAKACEN ARCHERY

689
obviously travel faster than a longer stick of the same section. Practical
application of the concept by the bowyer is a problem requiring a stady of
advanced bow design—a subject outside our present field. The scientific
principles involved have been examined by Klopsteg, who devotes to them a
complete chapter of his study of the Telhis, pp. 141-66.

Also essential to good flight shooting is a fast draw combined with a skilful
loose that will give the arrow a clean flight with minimal gadding or wagging,
since any lateral movement on the part of an arrow wili result in increased drag
and reduced range. A follow-through properly executed with a thrust of the
bow-hand against the grip at exactly the right moment will add several yards to
the distance that would otherwise be achieved, The shooting technique demands
the perfection of a rhythmic whole from beginning to end which can only be
acquired after many months of practice.

690Contrary to what the layman might suppose, flight shooting is not a simple
matter, nor is it merely a question of equipment and physical strength. It is an
art requiring of the experienced bowman the exercise of considerable skill if he
is to attain the extra few yards needed to give him victory over his equally
experienced competitors. On the technique of flight shooting a volume could be
written, but because of the scope and complexity of the subject we make no
attempt to compress the details within the narrow confines of a page or so. Nor
can we offer a satisfactory bibliography because the topic is one on which very
little has so far been published. Most, if not all, archers acquire their
knowledge of flight shooting by trial and error. Finally, a word of
warning. From the point of view of design the requirements of target/war/hunting
bows and their corresponding arrows differ from those of the bows and arrows of
the flight shooter. The first are not infrequently confused with the second, and
it should be noted that Kiopsteg’s observations on ballistics relate to arrows
of the second, rather than the first, of these two distinct classes.

In the Western archer’s mind flight shooting is associated with the Ottoman
Turks, partly because of references to their feats in European sources dating
from at least the eighteenth century, but more especially perhaps because of an
acquaintance with Hansard and a direct or indirect knowledge of the writings of
Mustafa Kani, Hein, Klopsteg, and Payne-Gallwey.  Although Ottoman flighr
shooting is not our direct concern, it is not without interest or relevance to
the present theme, and since Ottoman practice is comparatively well known and
seems to have had certain affinities with that of the Mamelukes, it cannot be
left out of account in the following paragraphs.

691
2. Aids to Flight Shooting


Flight shooters may, of course, use a full-length atrow. Greater distances,
however, can be attained with a shorter arrow, and the Ottomans, who brought the
sport to a high degree of perfection, used—in the nineteenth century at
least—small barrelled arrows about 24 in. in length and only about 150 gr. in
weight. To shoot such an arrow and at the same time bring the bow to full draw,
some sort of aid is needed since the tip of the arrowhead must come well inside
the bow.  The Ottomans used a grooved horn shelf known as a siper
(Pers. ‘shield’), which was strapped to the wrist of the bow-hand (Fig. 40). The
point of the arrow rested on the siper at full draw, and the groove guided it
past the bow when the string was loosed. Hein, lacking practical knowledge _ of
the bow and its accessories, did not fully understand the siper. For details the
reader is there- fore advised to consult Klopsteg, pp. 59-67, or failing that,
to refer to the brief account given by Faris and Elmer in Arab Archery,
pp. 174-75. Examples are preserved in Manchester Museum, Ingo Simon Collection,
Nos. 0.7739 and 0.7740.

692The majr@ (‘channel, guide’) to which our author refers and which seems to have
been synonymous with mijrat was also designed to enable the shooter to draw his
string further than the length of his arrow would otherwise permit. Used both by
Arabs and Persians (e.g. Arab Archery, pp. 124 ff. and pp. 174-76), it was, in
its simplest form, a slim, grooved channel of


ON FLIGHT SHOOTING 107 wood as long as a normal arrow (Fig. 52) and was drawn
with the short arrow inside the groove,

693
When the archer loosed, the arrow alone was shot and the puide remained, giving
the general effect of a crossbow. Arrow-guides were of various kinds as will be
seen in Ch, 26,



694

Fic. 40. THE TURKISH Siper

695
3. Behaviour of Flight Arrows


Great distances were achieved by Ottoman flight shooters (below, sect. 6), who
owed their success not only to the design of their bows, but also to that of
their arrows. Since we know of no study on the behaviour of fight arrows and as
the subject is relevant to the sectional arrow described in the anecdote related
in our text, we take up tbe point in some detail.

696In air a missile will achieve its greatest range when it is projected at an
angle of 431? and strikes the ground at an angle of about 54^. Now, a normal
target or war arrow has its centre of gravity (CG) 2-3 in. in front of its
geometric centre, The centre of pressure (CP) is the point through which all
upward forces may be considered to act, and with such arrows the CP is 2-3
in. behind the geometric centre, mainly because of the area of the
fletchings. The distance between the CG and CP gives the righting-moment and, as
this is relatively large, the long axis of the arrow remains virtually parallel
to the flight path. During its flight the arrow pitches through about 98° from
—44° to -+ 54°, and its pitching-rate is the same as the rate of change of angle
of the flight path.


108 SARACEN ARCHERY

697
Existing Ottoman flight arrows have their CG fractionally behind the geometric
centre of the arrow, and, as a result of their small fletchings, the CP is moved
forward and lies close to the CG (for detailed measurements, see F. W. Isles,
‘Turkish Flight Arrows’, in FSAA, vol. 4, 196r, pp. 25-28). Consequently, the
righting-moment is reduced, and the pitching-rate of the flight arrow is slower
than the rate of change of angle of the flight path. In this way a gliding
effect is produced, and the flight arrow does not follow the parabola of a
‘normal’ missile,

Apart from this way of reducing the pitching-rate to obtain the desired effect,
there js another approach to the problem. A sectional arrow may be used. In this
case, the weight is concentrated as far as possible at each end of the arrow,
and the ends are joined by the lightest available material.  This increases the
inertia of the arrow, and, provided that other factors are correctly related to
it, a reduced pitching-rate again results. It is likely that the sectional arrow
described in the text was of relatively heavy brazil-wood at the nock end, of
reed or bamboo in the centre, and of Cornelian Cherry in the foreshaft. The ibex
horn would be the material of which the head was made, This would stick into the
ground at the end of the flight with little risk of damage unless a stone was
struck.

698All measurements in flight arrows are highly critical and do not appear ever to
have been determined mathematically. Through the ages it has been entirely a
matter of trial and error in an attempt to produce the most effective design,
though it must be emphasized that, however effective the design of the arrow, a
high degree of perfection in shooting technique is essential to launch it. The
author is entirely right when he states that flight shooting reveals an archer’s
skill or lack of it.

Western archers interested in flight shooting have invariably followed the
Ottoman design in the manufacture of their atrows, firstly, because many are
stili in existence so that their specifi- cations are ascertainable, and
secondly, because their value is well proven, To our knowledge no sectional
fight arrow exists, and no thorough study has ever been made to ascertain the
merits such an arrow may have. Some archers have tried arrows of this kind, but
have discarded them

699as unsuccessful. Since the details of their construction are highly critical,
the reason for their failure could well be that no one has yet succeeded in
making one with the characteristics neces~ sary for sustained flight, which, as
we have seen, depends upon the correctness of pitching-rate.  A careful,
scientifically conducted series of tests could well provide interesting results
even if only to prove that the Ottoman approach with which we are familiar was
better.


4. Atmospheric Conditions

700
Although accorded only a passing reference in our text, atmospheric conditions
are a matter of considerable importance to the flight shooter. Shooting with the
wind naturally reduces drag and is therefore desirable. If at all possible, a
cross-wind should be avoided as it causes the arrow to fly at an angle, and drag
is increased. Since damp air is denser than dry, the latter is obviously
preferable, but whether it is given by a north, south, east, or west wind
depends entirely on geographical situation. Finally, a completely calm
atmosphere without turbulence at any altitude is the ideal. In the areas with
which we are concerned all the conditions most favourable to flight shooting
normally supervene in the early morning and the evening.

Some information on the subject of weather—not universally applicable in all
details because of local climatic variations—may be derived both from Arab
Archery (p. 120) and Mustafa Kani’s Telhis (Isl, XV, Pp. 279-80. Cf. Klopsteg,
pp. 116-17). In the second of the two works attention is drawn. to such factors
as the direction and speed of wind, air currents, and general atmospheric
considerations, and there is some mention of tests to establish their
suitability for shooting. On the Ok Meydanı (below) wind directions accounted
for the existence of seven main flight-shooting ranges which were used according
to the. wind prevailing at the time.

701
ON FLIGHT SHOOTING 109


5. Markers

702
From the earliest days of their cule the Ottomans were accustomed to hold
flight-shooting tournaments on some suitable mayddn, or field. To such an end an
open area to the north of Istanbul was dedicated in perpetuity by decree of
Muhammad II (Mehemmed, or Mehmet, reg.  A.D. 1451-81) and took the name by which
it is still known, viz. Ok Meydam, ‘Arrow Field’. In order to commemorate
distance records, it is usual for the company of archers to erect at the end of
the flight-course stone markers bearing some suitable inscription including the
name of the archer and the distance covered. In each range a ‘mother stone’
marked the first record, in relation to which all subsequent records in that
range were specified (cf. Klopsteg, pp. 117-18).  In Istanbul as recently as
1964 some twenty or thirty specimens measuring on average between five and seven
feet still survived on the Ok Meydani (G. L. Anderson, "Turkish Archery’,
British Archer, vol. 16, Dec.—Jan., 1964-5, pp. 150-51).

The widespread use of markers by the Turks is attested (Hein, Js/., XV,
pp. 244-45) and would seem to date at the very least from the first Mameluke
period, for the Maydan as-Sibag built in Cairo by Baybars I in 666/1267 as the
Maydan al-Qabag ts almost certainly to be understood as a flight-shooting field
and not as “Hippodrome of the Races’ as Ayalon supposes (Scripta, pp. 38-39).
The special marbie columns by which it was distinguished and which remained
there until 780/ 1378—some forty years or so after it had fallen into disuse
because of the gradual encroachment of buildings on its vast empty expanse—are
more compatible with what we know of flight- shooting practice than with
horse-racing, and ‘flight-shooting markers’ seems a much more appropriate
translation of ‘awdmid as-sibdg than Ayalon’s ‘Columns of Racing’, Lest such an
interpretation be doubted, due account should be taken of literary evidence that
in 702/1301-2 Amir Sayf ad-Din Baktüt in this very area established a
flight-shooting record over a distance marked by two marble columns (D!, goa;
D?, 1082). If Ayalon has erred, his error is under- standable since sibág with
the sense ‘flight-shooting’, which it indubitably has in the archer's
vocabulary, is not recorded in the standard dictionaries.

703
6. Flight-shooting Distances


The greatest recorded distance achieved with a hand bow is 972 yards. It was
shot by the Ottoman sultan, Selim III, in 1798 and was witnessed by Sir Robert
Ainslie, British Ambassador to the Porte. The distance is recorded as 1,400
Turkish pikes, and there is some controversy regarding the exact length of the
measure used to determine it. It must, however, be conceded that, even if the
smallest accredited equivalent is taken, 953 yards must be admitted (Klopsteg,
p. 31; this author devotes a whole chapter to distance records, pp. 15-32). This
compares with the modern world record shot in the U.S.A. by H. Drake in June
1967 which stands at 851 yds. 2 ft. 9 in.

704These distances have been exceeded in the U.S.A. with the foot bow, With this
bow the archer lies on his back, feet against the bow, and draws with both
hands. In this way a very powerful bow can be used, In the 1966 California State
Flight Shoot, Harry Drake shot 1,071 yards, which demonstrates that, given the
right equipment, weather conditions, and skill, an arrow can indeed be projected
over almost unbelievable distances.

Such ranges as these must not be confused with what could be achieved by the
same technique in war. E. McEwen (U.K.) has recently demonstrated that a
full-sized, light hunting arrow can be shot over 300 yards with a so-Ib. replica
of a Turkish flight bow. We would therefore expect skilled archers, using
stronger bows, to have been capable of putting down a harassing barrage at about
400 yards, There are three Turkish steel-headed arrows of the kind used for this
purpose in Manchester Museum (Ingo Simon Collection, No. 0.7723).

705Ali old Turkish and modern Western records have been established with short
flight arrows


IIO SARACEN ARCHERY

706
shot by means of a siper, or extended arrow-shelf, Yet great distances have been
covered with long arrows. The Cairene marble columns of which we have already
spoken (above, p. 109) apparently recorded the following feat:


The amir Sayf ad-Din Baktüt shot here in the Hijrah year 702 [1301-2] in the
presence of the Sultan’s Viceroy, Chamberlains, a company of Amirs, and a crowd
of spectators. Using a bow of 31 raris, Damascus weight [126 Ib.], whereof one
limb was strengthened, and an arrow weighing 71 dirhams [ca. 345 gr.] and two
fingers short of a full length [ca. 284 in. long], he covered 1,076 cubits,
Cairo standard [636 yds.], at a time when there was no wind. Arghün then shot
the course and exceeded the distance, but it was disallowed because of the
strength of the bow...

707
So far as wc know at the time of writing, this distance is the longest ever shot
with a long arrow,

There are two other records with which the distance may be compared. The first
is known to us from a third century B.c. inscription from Olbia on the north
coast of the Black Sea, now in Odessa Museum. It reads: ‘I say that the famous
Anaxagoras, son of Demagoras, shot 282 orguias’ (D. J. F. Hill, ‘Grecian and
Other Bow-Shots', in FSAA, vol. 6, 1963, p. 30). This is a distance of about 564
yards. The second comes fro: ‘The Stone of Jenghiz Khan’, a Mongolian inscrip-
tion now in the State Hermitage Museum at Leningrad. It records that in 1224 the
Khan’s nephew, Yisüngkà, shot an arrow over a distance of 335 alda (fathoms)
(W. E. McLeod, ‘The Range of the Ancient Bow’, in Phoenix, vol. 19, 1965,
p. 9). The length of an aida is controversial, but the distance achieved would
appear to have been in the order of 600 yards,

708Generally speaking, the best performance is obtained from a short bow when, as
in the case of the flight bow, it is used with a light arrow projected at high
velocity. A longbow, by contrast, is most effective when used with a heavy atrow
discharged at a lower velocity.


7. The Anecdote

709
The story of the Persian archer is not taken up later as promised. One's first
reaction is to suppose that the man from Nishapur was using equipment that was
not acceptable to ‘orthodox’ flight shooters. The point, however, would seem to
be that an innocent archer carrying a set of the finest flight-shooting
equipment that could be devised at the time was tricked into selling it.  The
purpose of his using an arrow-guide and sectional arrows will be clear from what
we have already said in sections 2 and 3 above. It remains only to remark that
although the two lead beads fitted to the bowstring would in fact fractionally
retard it when loosed, both archers in question—and probably other
contemporaries—were probably under the mistaken impression that a little added
weight was an advantage in that it gave greater thrust to the arrow.


CHAPTER 20

710
THE LIST OF THIRTY-FOUR POINTS


Wherein Lie the Secrets of Archery As Noted by Certain Great Masters

711
TAn archer does not merit the title and status of master (ustddh) until be is
truly competent and has perfect control over such parts of the body as should be
tensed, relaxed, or still, as the case may be; until he not only has a thorough
knowledge of the faults caused by tensing parts that should be relaxed (tashdid
al-layyin) and relaxing parts that ought to be tensed (talyin al- mushaddad) and
allowing movement where stillness is called for (rahrik as-sákin), but is also
fully acquainted with the injuries an archer can sustain together with their
causes; until he can appreciate differences of stature, the structure of the
limbs, and differences in their length; until he is quite familiar with
techniques that can either make or mar a man’s shooting, and is con- versant
with the differences of opinion held by authorities on these matters. In the
various parts of the body there are thirty-four points to be considered.


Of these, twenty are points of tension:

712
In the right arm there are eight:

1. The little finger; d 2. The ring-finger ; 3. The middle finger; 4. The thumb;

7135. The wrist;*

6. The elbow;

7147. The upper arm;

8. The muscle in the upper part of the forearm.

715
In the left arm there are six:?

. The little finger;

716. The ring-finger;

. The middle finger;

717. The wrist;

. The elbow;

718. The muscle in the lower part of the forearm.


Ata J» UJ) IM Hn

719
In the body there are six:

1. The right flank;

7202. The right shoulder;

3 & 4. Each of the shoulder-blades; 5. The spinal column;

7216. The belly.


III

722
LIZ SARACEN ARCHERY


Eleven are points of relaxation:

723
In the right arm there are two: i. The index finger; 2. The middle sinew of the
forearm.


In the /eft arm there are three:

7241. The index finger;

2. The thumb;

7253. The head of the forearm (i.e. the carpal, or wrist, end of the radius).


In the body there are four: 1. The left shoulder;

7262. The left side;

3. The waist;

7274. The neck.


In the dead there are two: I & 2, The lige.

728
Three are points of stillness: "X. The heart; 2&3. The eyes.


If a state of relaxation supervenes in any point of tension, or a state of
tension in any point of relaxation, the archer will find that certain faults and
injuries‘ follow according to the nature of his error. Thus, if tension at any
point in the left arm is allowed to lapse into relaxation, pain in the palm of
the hand and blistering (‘agr) of the fingers can result. Slashing of the
bow-hand (nfitàg al-qabdah) and distressing contusion of the wrist (taznid)®
arise from the same fault which, apart from causing the bowstring to strike the
wrist, also reduces the range of the arrow.

729Should the thuthb of the left hand be tensed, the proximal phalanx of the thumb
will blister.  If the index finger of this hand is tensed, the arrow will fly
high and miss the mark—a good thing in flight shooting, but thoroughly bad in
target shooting. H the left wrist is relaxed, splitting (shagq) of the skin can
occur between the thumb and index finger as well as blistering of the
arrow-guide formed by the thumb and of the proximal phalanx of the thumb. The
grip of the bow will also turn in the hand, and the bowstring twang to no
purpose. If the left elbow is relaxed, twisting and tremor (irii‘dsh) of the
forearm will result, the length of the draw will be reduced (ie. when the arrow
is supposedly at full draw), and traction will be poor. The left shoulder must
be relaxed, for if it is tensed, it will move upwards, and the bowstring will
strike it.  This results in the arrow’s slapping the arrow-pass (tadmik) "with
consequent deflection!, a wagging arrow (/a'b), or breakage of the shaft at the
fletching,® and causes the string to hit the tip of the thumb of the drawing
hand,

As regards locking, relaxation of any part for which tension has been indicated
can result in broken skin in the locking-fingers’ and a bruise (sawdd) on the
inside of the thumb and cause the String to hit the tip of the thumb of the
drawing hand.

730If the right index finger (shahddah) is tensed, a bruise will come up on the
inside of the thumb, blood wil! collect under the nail, and the nail will
break. Loosing will not be easy, and the string will rap the end of the right
indes finger. If the right wrist is relaxed, pain will pccur there, and traction
will be poor.

Hf the right elbow is relaxed, creeping (zagg) will result, the elbow will drop,
and the arrow fly high (?; the contrary is true) ‘and away from the mark. If the
right upper arm is relaxed, the bowstring may come away from ‘the base of! the
nock,? the shaft will slap the arrow-pass

731
THE LIST OF THIRTY-FOUR POINTS II3


(dimak), the arrow gad at the end of its course, and the bowstring rap the
forearm 'and chest.  If the right shouldcr is relaxed, the length of the draw
will be shortened, accuracy diminished, and the bowstring will rap the chest!.?
Other results will be a sluggish loose (futür al-itlag) and loss of range.

732If the neck is tensed,!? the effect will be tremor. If the lips are tense, there
will be distortion of the archer’s expression. The eyes should be still, for if
they are strained, they will stray and go out of focus. The back must be
straight and firm, for if it is relaxed, stooping Gnhina’) will result, traction
will be poor, the bowstring will rap the chest, and the arrow will gad at the
end of its course. If the left side is tensed, the arrow will fall short, and
traction will be poor. If the belly is relaxed fand allowed to protrude,’ hernia
(infitág) can result. If the waist is tensed, there will be loss of range, the
chest will protrude, and the string catch the archer’s beard. The heart must be
calm, for if it is preoccupied with anything but shooting, the whole operation
will be labour in vain.


COMMENT

733
Points of tension and relaxation are of vital importance to good shooting. The
requirements vary with the archer’s technique, which, in turn, varies with the
purpose to which the bow is put.  The style of shooting known as the zension
method was that of the longbow both in the days when it was still a weapon of
war and long after it had ceased to be such and archery had become a
pastime. The emphasis lay on firmness in all actions and a tight grip on the bow
(Archery (Badminton), Ch. xx, pp. 331-83). With the improvement of bow design a
major change in technique followed the development of modern target bows, and
the relaxed method, in which every possible tension was avoided, became the
vogue. In particular, the archer was to grasp loosely, relax the wrist of his
bow-hand, and keep his knees at ease. In more recent years, however, there has
been a tendency to attach greater importance to tension. A straight wrist, for
instance, is now widely favoured, and archers in general have adopted a
semi-tension method. There are, of course, many individual variations (on which,
see Elmer, Target Archery, pp. 415-21).

Contemporary shooting technique closely approximates to that advocated by
Taybugha. If we except the manner in which the drawing hand is applied to the
string (above, p. xxv), the only major difference—for the present at least—is
the grip on the bow. Pushing the bow away from them with the fork between thumb
and index finger, many archers now shoot with an open hand and wear a strap on
the wrist to prevent the bow from falling as each shot is completed.

734In much the same way as Taybughà, Mustafa Kani furnishes his readers with a list
of thirty- four points requiring tension, relaxation, or stillness, as the case
may be, Although strikingly similar to our author's list, it is by no means
identical with it. It has been adapted to meet the needs of the Ottoman flight
archer who not only used the siper (Fig. 40), but also built up the grip of his
bow with a strip of wax-impregnated linen termed mushamma’ (Klopsteg, pp. 71-73
and his fig. 35). Of these, the first required him to put a slight arch on his
wrist as viewed from the side, while the second provided the additional support
needed by the hand and wrist to main- tain a correct and unvarying grip on the
bow. Understandably, Mustafa Kani takes account of this and other factors and
adapts his list of points accordingly. Two of his details may be singled
out. Firstly, it should be noted that whereas it may be correct for a flight
shooter to hold his jaw well into his left shoulder with neck tensed (Jsi., XV,
p. 236), the same technique would be wholly incorrect in target shooting or on
the battlefield. The second detail worthy of note is that Mustafa Kani extends
his points of stillness to include the lungs. Correct breathing, of which
Taybughà surprisingly says nothing, is a very important point and applies to all
forms of archery.  Its importance was particularly recognized by the Japanese
(Acker, Japanese Archery, pp. 42-48).

The present chapter and the next are closely related. Every archer will have
experienced

735
114 SARACEN ARCHERY


certain inconsistencies developing from some kind of fault or will have
sustained injuries— mostly minor—caused by some error in technique. Although he
may well be aware that his shooting is marred by a fault, he may find it
extremely difficult to determine its nature without the aid of a competent coach
or some other person qualified to subject his every action to technical
scrutiny. It is obviously of great value to the archer who knows that his
technique is defective to be able to check the various possible causes against a
simple list of the kind contained in our treatise. In this way he can be sure
that nothing has been overlooked.

736In Arab Archery, in which seven chapters (xxii-xxviii) are devoted to errors and
their remedies, the subject is handled differently. A specific result of some
fault, such as the string's hitting the forearm, is taken and its possible
causes then discussed. Though perfectly adequate, the treatment is not as
detailed or comprehensive as Taybughà's, and there is little to be gained from
an exhaustive comparison.

The MSS of groups CD offer a slightly different version from that in our
text. The main difference is that the list embraces only thirty-two
points. Taken as a whole, the differences are so slight as to be of little
account.

737
CHAPTER 21 ON FAULTS AND INJURIES TO WHICH ARCHERS ARE EXPOSED


Injuries sustained by archers fall into five groups: 1. Rapping ‘of parts of the
body with the bowstring! (targ); 2. Blistering (‘agr); 3. Splitting "of skin and
nails! (shagg); 4. Tremor (érti‘ash); 5. Blue bruising (zurgah).

738
Rapping occurs in eight places: 1. The wrist (left);

The upper arm (left);

739. The shoulder (eft);

. The cheek (right);

740The chin;

. The nipple (left);

741. 'The end of the right index finger;

. The tip of the thumb (right).

742
Blistering occurs in five places: I. The fingers of the bow-hand; 2. The
arrow-guide "formed by the thumb’; 3. The distal phalanx of the thumb (right);
4. The ‘lower! half of the distal phalanx! of the right index finger; 5. The
base of the right index finger (i.e. just in front of the knuckle-joint).


Splitting occurs in four places: 1. Between the thumb and index finger of the
left hand; 2. In the proximal phalanx of the thumb (left); 3. Down the
thumb-nail (right); 4. Across the thumb-nail (right).

743
Blue bruising occurs in three places: 1. The tip of the right index finger; 2,
The pad (kulwah) of the right thumb!;?  3. Under the nail of the right index
finger, the size of a lentil.


11$

744
116 SARACEN ARCHERY


Tremor occurs in four places: 1. The right arm; 2. The left arm; 3. The entire
body; 4. The head.

745
Rapping of the "left! wrist results from eight causes: E. Slackness of the
grip-fingers; 2. Slackness of the wrist; . Protrusion of the shoulder; . The
internal draw (below, p. 120); - Too long a bowstring; . Squatting obliquely in
the case of an archer with a deep chest; . Too long an arrow; . Too strong a
bow.


Ss] OV UA i Ww

746
Six faults and mishaps result from all this: 1. Wagging of the arrow in flight;
2. Diminished accuracy; 3. Reduced effectiveness; 4. Loss of range; 5. A snapped
bowstring; 6. A cut sleeve.


Rapping of the Veft! upper arm arises from five errors: I. Inversion of the
cupping-point (ingilab al-fisád;? below, p- 120); 2. The internal draw;
3. Squatting obliquely; 4. Lifting the shoulders.

747
Four faults can result from this: I. Low flight (taszib as-sahm); 2. Diminished
accuracy;

3. Loss of range; 4. Reduced effectiveness.

748
Rapping of the "left! shoulder arises from four causes: 1. Overdrawing (by
misjudgement where the archer’s arrow is too long for his bow); 2. Protrusion of
the shoulder; 3. Excessive obliqueness in posture; 4. Too strong a bow.


Six results follow from this: I. Low flight; 2. A cut sleeve; 3. Slapping of the
arrow-pass ‘with consequent deflection! (tadmik); 4. A broken shaft; 5. A
wagging arrow; 6. Diminished accuracy.

749
ON FAULTS & INJURIES TO WHICH ARCHERS ARE EXPOSED 117


Rapping of the right check arises from three errors:

7501. Bending the neck sideways;

2. Overdrawing (in the sense indicated above);

7513. Squatting obliquely in the case of an archer with a short neck; for when such
a person adopts this position and draws, he inclines his head, and the bowstring
strikes his cheek, especially if he has a scanty beard. A short-necked person
should not, therefore, sit obliquely (Ch. 22). A squatting position directly
facing the mark is the only position suitable for such a person.


Rapping of the chin[beard arises from six errors: - I. Squatting obliquely in
the case of an archer with a short neck; 2. The internal draw; _.'3. Too long an
arrow; 4. Tensing the neck; 5. Tensing the waist; 6. Too strong a bow.

752
Rapping of the nipple arises from four causes: 1. Squatting obliquely; 2, The
internal draw!;* 3. Close proximity of the bowstring to the chest; 4. Excessive
dropping of the right! elbow.


Rapping of the right index finger arises from two causes: I, Tensing it on the
thumb at the draw; 2. Its being slack at the loose. Any person with long fingers
should keep his right finger away from the bowstring (i.e. to the right of it).

753
Rapping of the thumb arises from rwo faults: I. The tip of the thumb being held
limply on the middle phalanx of the middie finger at the draw; 2. A sluggish
loose.


Blistering of the fingers of the left hand arises from four causes:

7541. Slackness of the grip-fingers;

2. Too thin a grip;

7553. Grasping incorrectly;

4. The flesh on the palm gathering up under ‘pressure from! the belly and the
matn; for when one looses.and follows through with a forward and downward thrust
and the grip pinches” the flesh of one’s fingers, it results in diminished
accuracy, reduced effectiveness, and loss of range.

756
Blistering of that part of the thumb which guides the arrow (majrd) arises from
eight errors:


r. Pinching the nock (kkang al-káz) and pressing too heavily on the nockpiece
(kabb ‘ala

757
Lfüg; below, p. 120); . Downward displacement of the nocking-point; . Drawing
upwards and loosing downwards; . Too wide a nock; . Too narrow a nock;


Lh de UJ IN

758
II$ SARACEN ARCHERY


6. Too square a grasp (so that the wrist is brought too far round to the right)
and tension of the thumb; ; 7. Predominance, and consequent distortion, of the
leg of the bow (because of its greater

759
strength);


8. A crooked arrow.?*

760
Splits across the thumb-nail arise from four causes: 1. Having the thumb slack
when drawing, and fastening the right index finger over its tip; 2, The tip of
the thumb being off the middle finger; 3. Locking with the tip; 4. Releasing the
thumb before the right index finger. This fault can be eliminated by loosing
with the right index finger without opening the thumb "until afterwards?!.


1 Splits down the nail’ arise from five causes: 1. Opening the little finger;

761. Having nothing under the thumb to hold it in check;?

. Freeing the bowstring under the distal phalanx of the thumb; -

762. Fastening the tip of the right index finger on the thumb;

. Twisting the side of the thumb upwards, thus causing wear and tear on the side
of the nail with resultant splitting. The fault may be corrected by tensing the
three appropriate fingers, placing the tip of the thumb on the middle phalanx of
the middle finger where it should be held straight and tense, relaxing the right
index finger, and releasing with the latter before the thumb.!

763
maw N


Blue bruising of the pad of the thumb arises from two causes: 1. Its being
rapped by the bowstring; 2. Its being left too free.

764
Blue bruising of the tip of the right index finger arises from the following
cause: Loosing with the finger bent with the result that it is caught by the
string when loosed, This fault can be eliminated by keeping the index finger
outside (Le. to the right of) the bowstring when locking.


Blue bruising under the nail arises from four causes: 1. Shortness of the
fingers; 2, A relaxed thumb on the middle finger; 3. Putting only the very tip
(ratrif) of the index finger on the thumb; 4. Tensing the index finger over the
tip of the thumb.

765
Tremor arises from two causes: T. Relaxation of the elbows and shoulder-blades;
2. Tension in the neck.


The elimination of all these faults and their attendant ills can be achieved by
the application of reverse procedures. Thus, if tension in any part of the body
is the cause of the trouble, relaxa- tion is the remedy, and if relaxation is
the cause, tension is the cure. If an oblique squatung position (qu'ud
at-tahrif) is the cause, the mark should be faced directly. If too strong a bow
is the cause, the archer must shoot a bow to match his capacity, and if an arrow
is too long for him, he should draw only as much of it as his limbs will take,
and so on.

766There is no mystery about this sort of thing, and so, for the sake of brevity,
we have not always


ON FAULTS & INJURIES TO WHICH ARCHERS ARE EXPOSED 119

767
indicated the remedy for cach fault as it has arisen. All an archer need do is
to follow faithfully the advice contained in our poem (above, p. 4) since it
incorporates all the good advice he needs, and those who turn to it for guidance
and put its counsels into practice will acquire nothing but good habits and
immunity from the faults and injuries mentioned above. I have in fact only dealt
with the subject by way of supplementing my commentary.


COMMENT I. The List of Faults and Injuries

768
Dreary reading though it may be, a methodical list of faults and injuries such
as that arranged above is useful to the archer who lacks the tutored eye of a
master to spot the cause of some injury or misplaced shot. To check each of the
possible causes of his trouble against the list would be a relatively simple
task which could be followed by attempts to remedy the fault.

As in the case of the previous chapter, Mustafa Kani produces a list closely
resembling that of Taybughd, but, again, because of his preoccupation with
Ottoman flight shooting and the need to take into account the use of the
thumb-ring, muskamma', and siper, his treatment of the subject does diifer in
certain respects (Isl., XV, pp. 237-40). It might justly be argued that Taybugha
would have done well to comment here on the effects of ill-fitting thumb-guards,
for although be himself would appear to have shot with a bare thumb (above,
p. 34), he is clearly aware, a$ we have already seen in Ch, 6, that many archers
need such protection. In CD the omission is in fact made good (C!, 65a-66a; C?,
ro4b-ro5b; C3, 54b-55b; D}, 47b-482; D, 71b). Here we are told that a guard that
is too tight or has too long a lip will split the thumb-nail, and that when the
thumb is bent, it will, if the guard is too tight, suffer constriction and go
black, or its pad will turn blue, or eise it will be rapped by the string.

769
2. Injuries to the Drawing Hand


Without complete mastery of the thumb-lock it is difficult to appreciate fully
some of the finer points of a subject in which it is largely a question of
fractional deviations in the relative positions of the thumb and index
finger. There can nevertheless be no doubt that what suits one hand may ' not
suit another, and that results are the only true criterion of right and
wrong. When learning the — Oriental technique, the archer must bear this in mind
and patiently experiment until he finds by sheer trial and error the position
most suited to his needs. What is clear and at the same time universally
applicable is that the thumb must be firmly lodged against the middle phalanx of
the middle finger. Otherwise, there will be—in the author's own words-—‘nothing
under the thumb to hold it in check’ (p. 118).

770A fault liable to cause splits down the nail results from twisting the side of
the thumb upwards (Fig. 41). With his thumb in this position the archer is also
liable to pinch the nock of his arrow and allow his index finger to exert undue
pressure on the tail, A number of iliustrations which have so far appeared in
various publications show thumb-locks that are faulty by Taybugha’s
teaching. M. E. Elott, for instance, presents as the Korean lock what we style
‘wrong’ in our Fig. 41 (‘Technique of the Oriental Release’, Archery, Dec. 1962,
p. 18). Since this author studied under a Korean instructor, it may well be that
the Koreans’ view on the subject differs from that of our author, Alternatively,
it could be that the latter means not so much that the lock in question is wrong
as that it is conducive to the commission of certain errors. Again, both Elott
and R.  Willcox curl the tip of the index finger around the thumb (Elott, ibid.,
and R. Willcox, ‘Some- thing about the Thumb Ring’, TAM, Nov. 1962, p. 16). In
spite of our author's warning that it is a fault that will result in spasm
(kuzzdz; above, p. 51), Willcox nevertheless appears to find it no impediment to
successful shooting. Technically more orthodox by our standards, on the other


120 SARACEN ARCHERY

771
hand, is the lock illustrated by Faris and Elmer, though the position of the
thumb-tip, which rests against the joint of the middle finger instead of the
phalanx, leaves room for criticism. (Mis- interpretation of the Arabic ‘ugdak as
‘joint’, a sense which it usually has, may account for the error). i



772

Fic. 41, TWISTING THE THUMB

773
3. ‘Inversion of the Cupping-point’


This is clearly the fault whereby the left elbow, as viewed by the archer with
arm outstretched, is allowed to twist round in an anti-clockwise direction. The
result of the fault is that the point of the elbow drops from the horizontal,
and the arm curves inwards towards the path of the string with the consequent
danger of its being hit. The prominent vein (termed the ‘basilic’) which runs
from the bend of the elbow upwards along the inner side of the upper arm may
well burst open under the impact. The basilic vein is generally that opened for
biood-letting, hence the reference to the ‘cupping-point’.

774
4. The Internal Draw


Rapping, by which is meant the action of the bowstring in striking some part of
the person, is caused by (8) the encroachment of any part of the body upon the
path of the string, and (b) what the author terms the internal draw (al-madd
al-juwwäni). The second of these two causes requires some explanation. What
happens is that the archer, instead of drawing the string directly to his face,
first draws it closely along the inside of his left arm and then sharply
deflects the path of his drawing hand outwards across his face. With a tight
grip such as he should have on the handle he is sure, in this event, to put a
twist into his bow, Consequently, the string, when loosed, will not only travel
forward, but it will also spring over to the left and thus be liable to strike
the arm or wrist.

775In passing we may mention that with the Mediterranean loose, or three-finger
draw, used by most of the old European bowmen as well as by modern Western
archers, the wrist is commonly struck. For this reason a bracer, or arm-guard,
should always be worn as the arm may be lightly hit even when a shot is
correctly executed. With the thumb-lock, on the other hand, a bracer is not
needed since the arm is never struck unless therc is some fault in technique.


5. Sounds Emitted by Equipment

776
The variant reading taswit as-sahkm (‘emission of sound by the arrow’) for our
tasteib as-sahm (p. 116) poses the problem of deciding which of the two' is more
acceptable. Prima facie, the former seems preferable to the latter, especially
since we would normally expect taswib as-sakm to mean ‘directing the arrow
straight at the mark’, a sense which it clearly cannot have in the


ON FAULTS & INJURIES TO WHICH ARCHERS ARE EXPOSED 121

777
context. But what sounds are emitted by an arrow? There is only one sound, and
that is produced when the shaftment strikes the arrow-pass as it leaves the bow,
the cause being either the use of unsuitable or defective equipment, or an error
on the part of the archer. More precisely, it is caused by ‘twisting the grip on
loosing, a bad grasp, pinching the nock’ or by ‘too big a loop, or a bad arrow
that is defective either because it is too thin or of too weak a wood or roughly
cut in the making’ (C!, 66a-b; C?, 1o6a-b; C*, 555—562, ctc.). Practical trials
so far completed suggest that the archer’s errors said by our author to result
in raswib as-sahm do not result in the emission of any sound, but rather in low
flight. We therefore retain tagwib and take the expression to mean ‘causing the
arrow to fly low" (from lack of initial velocity) on the basis of the senses ‘to
lower’, as of the head, and ‘to descend’ indicated for forms II and V
respectively of the Arabic root from which tagzi derives.


6. ‘Predominance’ of the Lower Limb

778
‘Predominance of the leg of the bow’ (p. 118) is the best translation we can
offer of the words qiyàm rij! al-qaws. It is a difficult expression with which
Faris and Elmer had also to come to grips (Arab Archery, p. 72, n. 29). The
sense, on the other hand, seems to be fairly clear. The implication is that the
lower limb of the bow 3s the stronger. Under these circumstances the lower limb
travels faster than rhe upper when the bow is loosed, and at the instant the
arrow leaves the string the nock is too low in relation to the thumb of the
bow-hand, thereby causing the shaft—propelled by uneven thrust—to rub too much
against the thumb. A composite bow can develop such a fault even though both
limbs were correctly balanced at the time of manu- facture. It can be easily
corrected by heat treatment (above, p. 99), as we have proved by


experiment.

779
CHAPTER 22 ON ADJUSTMENTS Injuries sustained by archers fall into five groups: 1. Rapping ‘of parts of the
body with the bowstring! (targ); 2. Blistering (‘agr); 3. Splitting "of skin and
nails! (shagg); 4. Tremor (érti‘ash); 5. Blue bruising (zurgah).

738
Rapping occurs in eight places: 1. The wrist (left);

The upper arm (left);

739. The shoulder (eft);

. The cheek (right);

740The chin;

. The nipple (left);

741. 'The end of the right index finger;

. The tip of the thumb (right).

742
Blistering occurs in five places: I. The fingers of the bow-hand; 2. The
arrow-guide "formed by the thumb’; 3. The distal phalanx of the thumb (right);
4. The ‘lower! half of the distal phalanx! of the right index finger; 5. The
base of the right index finger (i.e. just in front of the knuckle-joint).


Splitting occurs in four places: 1. Between the thumb and index finger of the
left hand; 2. In the proximal phalanx of the thumb (left); 3. Down the
thumb-nail (right); 4. Across the thumb-nail (right).

743
Blue bruising occurs in three places: 1. The tip of the right index finger; 2,
The pad (kulwah) of the right thumb!;?  3. Under the nail of the right index
finger, the size of a lentil.


11$

744
116 SARACEN ARCHERY


Tremor occurs in four places: 1. The right arm; 2. The left arm; 3. The entire
body; 4. The head.

745
Rapping of the "left! wrist results from eight causes: E. Slackness of the
grip-fingers; 2. Slackness of the wrist; . Protrusion of the shoulder; . The
internal draw (below, p. 120); - Too long a bowstring; . Squatting obliquely in
the case of an archer with a deep chest; . Too long an arrow; . Too strong a
bow.


Ss] OV UA i Ww

746
Six faults and mishaps result from all this: 1. Wagging of the arrow in flight;
2. Diminished accuracy; 3. Reduced effectiveness; 4. Loss of range; 5. A snapped
bowstring; 6. A cut sleeve.


Rapping of the Veft! upper arm arises from five errors: I. Inversion of the
cupping-point (ingilab al-fisád;? below, p- 120); 2. The internal draw;
3. Squatting obliquely; 4. Lifting the shoulders.

747
Four faults can result from this: I. Low flight (taszib as-sahm); 2. Diminished
accuracy;

3. Loss of range; 4. Reduced effectiveness.

748
Rapping of the "left! shoulder arises from four causes: 1. Overdrawing (by
misjudgement where the archer’s arrow is too long for his bow); 2. Protrusion of
the shoulder; 3. Excessive obliqueness in posture; 4. Too strong a bow.


Six results follow from this: I. Low flight; 2. A cut sleeve; 3. Slapping of the
arrow-pass ‘with consequent deflection! (tadmik); 4. A broken shaft; 5. A
wagging arrow; 6. Diminished accuracy.

749
ON FAULTS & INJURIES TO WHICH ARCHERS ARE EXPOSED 117


Rapping of the right check arises from three errors:

7501. Bending the neck sideways;

2. Overdrawing (in the sense indicated above);

7513. Squatting obliquely in the case of an archer with a short neck; for when such
a person adopts this position and draws, he inclines his head, and the bowstring
strikes his cheek, especially if he has a scanty beard. A short-necked person
should not, therefore, sit obliquely (Ch. 22). A squatting position directly
facing the mark is the only position suitable for such a person.


Rapping of the chin[beard arises from six errors: - I. Squatting obliquely in
the case of an archer with a short neck; 2. The internal draw; _.'3. Too long an
arrow; 4. Tensing the neck; 5. Tensing the waist; 6. Too strong a bow.

752
Rapping of the nipple arises from four causes: 1. Squatting obliquely; 2, The
internal draw!;* 3. Close proximity of the bowstring to the chest; 4. Excessive
dropping of the right! elbow.


Rapping of the right index finger arises from two causes: I, Tensing it on the
thumb at the draw; 2. Its being slack at the loose. Any person with long fingers
should keep his right finger away from the bowstring (i.e. to the right of it).

753
Rapping of the thumb arises from rwo faults: I. The tip of the thumb being held
limply on the middle phalanx of the middie finger at the draw; 2. A sluggish
loose.


Blistering of the fingers of the left hand arises from four causes:

7541. Slackness of the grip-fingers;

2. Too thin a grip;

7553. Grasping incorrectly;

4. The flesh on the palm gathering up under ‘pressure from! the belly and the
matn; for when one looses.and follows through with a forward and downward thrust
and the grip pinches” the flesh of one’s fingers, it results in diminished
accuracy, reduced effectiveness, and loss of range.

756
Blistering of that part of the thumb which guides the arrow (majrd) arises from
eight errors:


r. Pinching the nock (kkang al-káz) and pressing too heavily on the nockpiece
(kabb ‘ala

757
Lfüg; below, p. 120); . Downward displacement of the nocking-point; . Drawing
upwards and loosing downwards; . Too wide a nock; . Too narrow a nock;


Lh de UJ IN

758
II$ SARACEN ARCHERY


6. Too square a grasp (so that the wrist is brought too far round to the right)
and tension of the thumb; ; 7. Predominance, and consequent distortion, of the
leg of the bow (because of its greater

759
strength);


8. A crooked arrow.?*

760
Splits across the thumb-nail arise from four causes: 1. Having the thumb slack
when drawing, and fastening the right index finger over its tip; 2, The tip of
the thumb being off the middle finger; 3. Locking with the tip; 4. Releasing the
thumb before the right index finger. This fault can be eliminated by loosing
with the right index finger without opening the thumb "until afterwards?!.


1 Splits down the nail’ arise from five causes: 1. Opening the little finger;

761. Having nothing under the thumb to hold it in check;?

. Freeing the bowstring under the distal phalanx of the thumb; -

762. Fastening the tip of the right index finger on the thumb;

. Twisting the side of the thumb upwards, thus causing wear and tear on the side
of the nail with resultant splitting. The fault may be corrected by tensing the
three appropriate fingers, placing the tip of the thumb on the middle phalanx of
the middle finger where it should be held straight and tense, relaxing the right
index finger, and releasing with the latter before the thumb.!

763
maw N


Blue bruising of the pad of the thumb arises from two causes: 1. Its being
rapped by the bowstring; 2. Its being left too free.

764
Blue bruising of the tip of the right index finger arises from the following
cause: Loosing with the finger bent with the result that it is caught by the
string when loosed, This fault can be eliminated by keeping the index finger
outside (Le. to the right of) the bowstring when locking.


Blue bruising under the nail arises from four causes: 1. Shortness of the
fingers; 2, A relaxed thumb on the middle finger; 3. Putting only the very tip
(ratrif) of the index finger on the thumb; 4. Tensing the index finger over the
tip of the thumb.

765
Tremor arises from two causes: T. Relaxation of the elbows and shoulder-blades;
2. Tension in the neck.


The elimination of all these faults and their attendant ills can be achieved by
the application of reverse procedures. Thus, if tension in any part of the body
is the cause of the trouble, relaxa- tion is the remedy, and if relaxation is
the cause, tension is the cure. If an oblique squatung position (qu'ud
at-tahrif) is the cause, the mark should be faced directly. If too strong a bow
is the cause, the archer must shoot a bow to match his capacity, and if an arrow
is too long for him, he should draw only as much of it as his limbs will take,
and so on.

766There is no mystery about this sort of thing, and so, for the sake of brevity,
we have not always


ON FAULTS & INJURIES TO WHICH ARCHERS ARE EXPOSED 119

767
indicated the remedy for cach fault as it has arisen. All an archer need do is
to follow faithfully the advice contained in our poem (above, p. 4) since it
incorporates all the good advice he needs, and those who turn to it for guidance
and put its counsels into practice will acquire nothing but good habits and
immunity from the faults and injuries mentioned above. I have in fact only dealt
with the subject by way of supplementing my commentary.


COMMENT I. The List of Faults and Injuries

768
Dreary reading though it may be, a methodical list of faults and injuries such
as that arranged above is useful to the archer who lacks the tutored eye of a
master to spot the cause of some injury or misplaced shot. To check each of the
possible causes of his trouble against the list would be a relatively simple
task which could be followed by attempts to remedy the fault.

As in the case of the previous chapter, Mustafa Kani produces a list closely
resembling that of Taybughd, but, again, because of his preoccupation with
Ottoman flight shooting and the need to take into account the use of the
thumb-ring, muskamma', and siper, his treatment of the subject does diifer in
certain respects (Isl., XV, pp. 237-40). It might justly be argued that Taybugha
would have done well to comment here on the effects of ill-fitting thumb-guards,
for although be himself would appear to have shot with a bare thumb (above,
p. 34), he is clearly aware, a$ we have already seen in Ch, 6, that many archers
need such protection. In CD the omission is in fact made good (C!, 65a-66a; C?,
ro4b-ro5b; C3, 54b-55b; D}, 47b-482; D, 71b). Here we are told that a guard that
is too tight or has too long a lip will split the thumb-nail, and that when the
thumb is bent, it will, if the guard is too tight, suffer constriction and go
black, or its pad will turn blue, or eise it will be rapped by the string.

769
2. Injuries to the Drawing Hand


Without complete mastery of the thumb-lock it is difficult to appreciate fully
some of the finer points of a subject in which it is largely a question of
fractional deviations in the relative positions of the thumb and index
finger. There can nevertheless be no doubt that what suits one hand may ' not
suit another, and that results are the only true criterion of right and
wrong. When learning the — Oriental technique, the archer must bear this in mind
and patiently experiment until he finds by sheer trial and error the position
most suited to his needs. What is clear and at the same time universally
applicable is that the thumb must be firmly lodged against the middle phalanx of
the middle finger. Otherwise, there will be—in the author's own words-—‘nothing
under the thumb to hold it in check’ (p. 118).

770A fault liable to cause splits down the nail results from twisting the side of
the thumb upwards (Fig. 41). With his thumb in this position the archer is also
liable to pinch the nock of his arrow and allow his index finger to exert undue
pressure on the tail, A number of iliustrations which have so far appeared in
various publications show thumb-locks that are faulty by Taybugha’s
teaching. M. E. Elott, for instance, presents as the Korean lock what we style
‘wrong’ in our Fig. 41 (‘Technique of the Oriental Release’, Archery, Dec. 1962,
p. 18). Since this author studied under a Korean instructor, it may well be that
the Koreans’ view on the subject differs from that of our author, Alternatively,
it could be that the latter means not so much that the lock in question is wrong
as that it is conducive to the commission of certain errors. Again, both Elott
and R.  Willcox curl the tip of the index finger around the thumb (Elott, ibid.,
and R. Willcox, ‘Some- thing about the Thumb Ring’, TAM, Nov. 1962, p. 16). In
spite of our author's warning that it is a fault that will result in spasm
(kuzzdz; above, p. 51), Willcox nevertheless appears to find it no impediment to
successful shooting. Technically more orthodox by our standards, on the other


120 SARACEN ARCHERY

771
hand, is the lock illustrated by Faris and Elmer, though the position of the
thumb-tip, which rests against the joint of the middle finger instead of the
phalanx, leaves room for criticism. (Mis- interpretation of the Arabic ‘ugdak as
‘joint’, a sense which it usually has, may account for the error). i



772

Fic. 41, TWISTING THE THUMB

773
3. ‘Inversion of the Cupping-point’


This is clearly the fault whereby the left elbow, as viewed by the archer with
arm outstretched, is allowed to twist round in an anti-clockwise direction. The
result of the fault is that the point of the elbow drops from the horizontal,
and the arm curves inwards towards the path of the string with the consequent
danger of its being hit. The prominent vein (termed the ‘basilic’) which runs
from the bend of the elbow upwards along the inner side of the upper arm may
well burst open under the impact. The basilic vein is generally that opened for
biood-letting, hence the reference to the ‘cupping-point’.

774
4. The Internal Draw


Rapping, by which is meant the action of the bowstring in striking some part of
the person, is caused by (8) the encroachment of any part of the body upon the
path of the string, and (b) what the author terms the internal draw (al-madd
al-juwwäni). The second of these two causes requires some explanation. What
happens is that the archer, instead of drawing the string directly to his face,
first draws it closely along the inside of his left arm and then sharply
deflects the path of his drawing hand outwards across his face. With a tight
grip such as he should have on the handle he is sure, in this event, to put a
twist into his bow, Consequently, the string, when loosed, will not only travel
forward, but it will also spring over to the left and thus be liable to strike
the arm or wrist.

775In passing we may mention that with the Mediterranean loose, or three-finger
draw, used by most of the old European bowmen as well as by modern Western
archers, the wrist is commonly struck. For this reason a bracer, or arm-guard,
should always be worn as the arm may be lightly hit even when a shot is
correctly executed. With the thumb-lock, on the other hand, a bracer is not
needed since the arm is never struck unless therc is some fault in technique.


5. Sounds Emitted by Equipment

776
The variant reading taswit as-sahkm (‘emission of sound by the arrow’) for our
tasteib as-sahm (p. 116) poses the problem of deciding which of the two' is more
acceptable. Prima facie, the former seems preferable to the latter, especially
since we would normally expect taswib as-sakm to mean ‘directing the arrow
straight at the mark’, a sense which it clearly cannot have in the


ON FAULTS & INJURIES TO WHICH ARCHERS ARE EXPOSED 121

777
context. But what sounds are emitted by an arrow? There is only one sound, and
that is produced when the shaftment strikes the arrow-pass as it leaves the bow,
the cause being either the use of unsuitable or defective equipment, or an error
on the part of the archer. More precisely, it is caused by ‘twisting the grip on
loosing, a bad grasp, pinching the nock’ or by ‘too big a loop, or a bad arrow
that is defective either because it is too thin or of too weak a wood or roughly
cut in the making’ (C!, 66a-b; C?, 1o6a-b; C*, 555—562, ctc.). Practical trials
so far completed suggest that the archer’s errors said by our author to result
in raswib as-sahm do not result in the emission of any sound, but rather in low
flight. We therefore retain tagwib and take the expression to mean ‘causing the
arrow to fly low" (from lack of initial velocity) on the basis of the senses ‘to
lower’, as of the head, and ‘to descend’ indicated for forms II and V
respectively of the Arabic root from which tagzi derives.


6. ‘Predominance’ of the Lower Limb

778
‘Predominance of the leg of the bow’ (p. 118) is the best translation we can
offer of the words qiyàm rij! al-qaws. It is a difficult expression with which
Faris and Elmer had also to come to grips (Arab Archery, p. 72, n. 29). The
sense, on the other hand, seems to be fairly clear. The implication is that the
lower limb of the bow 3s the stronger. Under these circumstances the lower limb
travels faster than rhe upper when the bow is loosed, and at the instant the
arrow leaves the string the nock is too low in relation to the thumb of the
bow-hand, thereby causing the shaft—propelled by uneven thrust—to rub too much
against the thumb. A composite bow can develop such a fault even though both
limbs were correctly balanced at the time of manu- facture. It can be easily
corrected by heat treatment (above, p. 99), as we have proved by


experiment.

779
CHAPTER 22 ON ADJUSTMENTS Injuries sustained by archers fall into five groups: 1. Rapping ‘of parts of the
body with the bowstring! (targ); 2. Blistering (‘agr); 3. Splitting "of skin and
nails! (shagg); 4. Tremor (érti‘ash); 5. Blue bruising (zurgah).

738
Rapping occurs in eight places: 1. The wrist (left);

The upper arm (left);

739. The shoulder (eft);

. The cheek (right);

740The chin;

. The nipple (left);

741. 'The end of the right index finger;

. The tip of the thumb (right).

742
Blistering occurs in five places: I. The fingers of the bow-hand; 2. The
arrow-guide "formed by the thumb’; 3. The distal phalanx of the thumb (right);
4. The ‘lower! half of the distal phalanx! of the right index finger; 5. The
base of the right index finger (i.e. just in front of the knuckle-joint).


Splitting occurs in four places: 1. Between the thumb and index finger of the
left hand; 2. In the proximal phalanx of the thumb (left); 3. Down the
thumb-nail (right); 4. Across the thumb-nail (right).

743
Blue bruising occurs in three places: 1. The tip of the right index finger; 2,
The pad (kulwah) of the right thumb!;?  3. Under the nail of the right index
finger, the size of a lentil.


11$

744
116 SARACEN ARCHERY


Tremor occurs in four places: 1. The right arm; 2. The left arm; 3. The entire
body; 4. The head.

745
Rapping of the "left! wrist results from eight causes: E. Slackness of the
grip-fingers; 2. Slackness of the wrist; . Protrusion of the shoulder; . The
internal draw (below, p. 120); - Too long a bowstring; . Squatting obliquely in
the case of an archer with a deep chest; . Too long an arrow; . Too strong a
bow.


Ss] OV UA i Ww

746
Six faults and mishaps result from all this: 1. Wagging of the arrow in flight;
2. Diminished accuracy; 3. Reduced effectiveness; 4. Loss of range; 5. A snapped
bowstring; 6. A cut sleeve.


Rapping of the Veft! upper arm arises from five errors: I. Inversion of the
cupping-point (ingilab al-fisád;? below, p- 120); 2. The internal draw;
3. Squatting obliquely; 4. Lifting the shoulders.

747
Four faults can result from this: I. Low flight (taszib as-sahm); 2. Diminished
accuracy;

3. Loss of range; 4. Reduced effectiveness.

748
Rapping of the "left! shoulder arises from four causes: 1. Overdrawing (by
misjudgement where the archer’s arrow is too long for his bow); 2. Protrusion of
the shoulder; 3. Excessive obliqueness in posture; 4. Too strong a bow.


Six results follow from this: I. Low flight; 2. A cut sleeve; 3. Slapping of the
arrow-pass ‘with consequent deflection! (tadmik); 4. A broken shaft; 5. A
wagging arrow; 6. Diminished accuracy.

749
ON FAULTS & INJURIES TO WHICH ARCHERS ARE EXPOSED 117


Rapping of the right check arises from three errors:

7501. Bending the neck sideways;

2. Overdrawing (in the sense indicated above);

7513. Squatting obliquely in the case of an archer with a short neck; for when such
a person adopts this position and draws, he inclines his head, and the bowstring
strikes his cheek, especially if he has a scanty beard. A short-necked person
should not, therefore, sit obliquely (Ch. 22). A squatting position directly
facing the mark is the only position suitable for such a person.


Rapping of the chin[beard arises from six errors: - I. Squatting obliquely in
the case of an archer with a short neck; 2. The internal draw; _.'3. Too long an
arrow; 4. Tensing the neck; 5. Tensing the waist; 6. Too strong a bow.

752
Rapping of the nipple arises from four causes: 1. Squatting obliquely; 2, The
internal draw!;* 3. Close proximity of the bowstring to the chest; 4. Excessive
dropping of the right! elbow.


Rapping of the right index finger arises from two causes: I, Tensing it on the
thumb at the draw; 2. Its being slack at the loose. Any person with long fingers
should keep his right finger away from the bowstring (i.e. to the right of it).

753
Rapping of the thumb arises from rwo faults: I. The tip of the thumb being held
limply on the middle phalanx of the middie finger at the draw; 2. A sluggish
loose.


Blistering of the fingers of the left hand arises from four causes:

7541. Slackness of the grip-fingers;

2. Too thin a grip;

7553. Grasping incorrectly;

4. The flesh on the palm gathering up under ‘pressure from! the belly and the
matn; for when one looses.and follows through with a forward and downward thrust
and the grip pinches” the flesh of one’s fingers, it results in diminished
accuracy, reduced effectiveness, and loss of range.

756
Blistering of that part of the thumb which guides the arrow (majrd) arises from
eight errors:


r. Pinching the nock (kkang al-káz) and pressing too heavily on the nockpiece
(kabb ‘ala

757
Lfüg; below, p. 120); . Downward displacement of the nocking-point; . Drawing
upwards and loosing downwards; . Too wide a nock; . Too narrow a nock;


Lh de UJ IN

758
II$ SARACEN ARCHERY


6. Too square a grasp (so that the wrist is brought too far round to the right)
and tension of the thumb; ; 7. Predominance, and consequent distortion, of the
leg of the bow (because of its greater

759
strength);


8. A crooked arrow.?*

760
Splits across the thumb-nail arise from four causes: 1. Having the thumb slack
when drawing, and fastening the right index finger over its tip; 2, The tip of
the thumb being off the middle finger; 3. Locking with the tip; 4. Releasing the
thumb before the right index finger. This fault can be eliminated by loosing
with the right index finger without opening the thumb "until afterwards?!.


1 Splits down the nail’ arise from five causes: 1. Opening the little finger;

761. Having nothing under the thumb to hold it in check;?

. Freeing the bowstring under the distal phalanx of the thumb; -

762. Fastening the tip of the right index finger on the thumb;

. Twisting the side of the thumb upwards, thus causing wear and tear on the side
of the nail with resultant splitting. The fault may be corrected by tensing the
three appropriate fingers, placing the tip of the thumb on the middle phalanx of
the middle finger where it should be held straight and tense, relaxing the right
index finger, and releasing with the latter before the thumb.!

763
maw N


Blue bruising of the pad of the thumb arises from two causes: 1. Its being
rapped by the bowstring; 2. Its being left too free.

764
Blue bruising of the tip of the right index finger arises from the following
cause: Loosing with the finger bent with the result that it is caught by the
string when loosed, This fault can be eliminated by keeping the index finger
outside (Le. to the right of) the bowstring when locking.


Blue bruising under the nail arises from four causes: 1. Shortness of the
fingers; 2, A relaxed thumb on the middle finger; 3. Putting only the very tip
(ratrif) of the index finger on the thumb; 4. Tensing the index finger over the
tip of the thumb.

765
Tremor arises from two causes: T. Relaxation of the elbows and shoulder-blades;
2. Tension in the neck.


The elimination of all these faults and their attendant ills can be achieved by
the application of reverse procedures. Thus, if tension in any part of the body
is the cause of the trouble, relaxa- tion is the remedy, and if relaxation is
the cause, tension is the cure. If an oblique squatung position (qu'ud
at-tahrif) is the cause, the mark should be faced directly. If too strong a bow
is the cause, the archer must shoot a bow to match his capacity, and if an arrow
is too long for him, he should draw only as much of it as his limbs will take,
and so on.

766There is no mystery about this sort of thing, and so, for the sake of brevity,
we have not always


ON FAULTS & INJURIES TO WHICH ARCHERS ARE EXPOSED 119

767
indicated the remedy for cach fault as it has arisen. All an archer need do is
to follow faithfully the advice contained in our poem (above, p. 4) since it
incorporates all the good advice he needs, and those who turn to it for guidance
and put its counsels into practice will acquire nothing but good habits and
immunity from the faults and injuries mentioned above. I have in fact only dealt
with the subject by way of supplementing my commentary.


COMMENT I. The List of Faults and Injuries

768
Dreary reading though it may be, a methodical list of faults and injuries such
as that arranged above is useful to the archer who lacks the tutored eye of a
master to spot the cause of some injury or misplaced shot. To check each of the
possible causes of his trouble against the list would be a relatively simple
task which could be followed by attempts to remedy the fault.

As in the case of the previous chapter, Mustafa Kani produces a list closely
resembling that of Taybughd, but, again, because of his preoccupation with
Ottoman flight shooting and the need to take into account the use of the
thumb-ring, muskamma', and siper, his treatment of the subject does diifer in
certain respects (Isl., XV, pp. 237-40). It might justly be argued that Taybugha
would have done well to comment here on the effects of ill-fitting thumb-guards,
for although be himself would appear to have shot with a bare thumb (above,
p. 34), he is clearly aware, a$ we have already seen in Ch, 6, that many archers
need such protection. In CD the omission is in fact made good (C!, 65a-66a; C?,
ro4b-ro5b; C3, 54b-55b; D}, 47b-482; D, 71b). Here we are told that a guard that
is too tight or has too long a lip will split the thumb-nail, and that when the
thumb is bent, it will, if the guard is too tight, suffer constriction and go
black, or its pad will turn blue, or eise it will be rapped by the string.

769
2. Injuries to the Drawing Hand


Without complete mastery of the thumb-lock it is difficult to appreciate fully
some of the finer points of a subject in which it is largely a question of
fractional deviations in the relative positions of the thumb and index
finger. There can nevertheless be no doubt that what suits one hand may ' not
suit another, and that results are the only true criterion of right and
wrong. When learning the — Oriental technique, the archer must bear this in mind
and patiently experiment until he finds by sheer trial and error the position
most suited to his needs. What is clear and at the same time universally
applicable is that the thumb must be firmly lodged against the middle phalanx of
the middle finger. Otherwise, there will be—in the author's own words-—‘nothing
under the thumb to hold it in check’ (p. 118).

770A fault liable to cause splits down the nail results from twisting the side of
the thumb upwards (Fig. 41). With his thumb in this position the archer is also
liable to pinch the nock of his arrow and allow his index finger to exert undue
pressure on the tail, A number of iliustrations which have so far appeared in
various publications show thumb-locks that are faulty by Taybugha’s
teaching. M. E. Elott, for instance, presents as the Korean lock what we style
‘wrong’ in our Fig. 41 (‘Technique of the Oriental Release’, Archery, Dec. 1962,
p. 18). Since this author studied under a Korean instructor, it may well be that
the Koreans’ view on the subject differs from that of our author, Alternatively,
it could be that the latter means not so much that the lock in question is wrong
as that it is conducive to the commission of certain errors. Again, both Elott
and R.  Willcox curl the tip of the index finger around the thumb (Elott, ibid.,
and R. Willcox, ‘Some- thing about the Thumb Ring’, TAM, Nov. 1962, p. 16). In
spite of our author's warning that it is a fault that will result in spasm
(kuzzdz; above, p. 51), Willcox nevertheless appears to find it no impediment to
successful shooting. Technically more orthodox by our standards, on the other


120 SARACEN ARCHERY

771
hand, is the lock illustrated by Faris and Elmer, though the position of the
thumb-tip, which rests against the joint of the middle finger instead of the
phalanx, leaves room for criticism. (Mis- interpretation of the Arabic ‘ugdak as
‘joint’, a sense which it usually has, may account for the error). i



772

Fic. 41, TWISTING THE THUMB

773
3. ‘Inversion of the Cupping-point’


This is clearly the fault whereby the left elbow, as viewed by the archer with
arm outstretched, is allowed to twist round in an anti-clockwise direction. The
result of the fault is that the point of the elbow drops from the horizontal,
and the arm curves inwards towards the path of the string with the consequent
danger of its being hit. The prominent vein (termed the ‘basilic’) which runs
from the bend of the elbow upwards along the inner side of the upper arm may
well burst open under the impact. The basilic vein is generally that opened for
biood-letting, hence the reference to the ‘cupping-point’.

774
4. The Internal Draw


Rapping, by which is meant the action of the bowstring in striking some part of
the person, is caused by (8) the encroachment of any part of the body upon the
path of the string, and (b) what the author terms the internal draw (al-madd
al-juwwäni). The second of these two causes requires some explanation. What
happens is that the archer, instead of drawing the string directly to his face,
first draws it closely along the inside of his left arm and then sharply
deflects the path of his drawing hand outwards across his face. With a tight
grip such as he should have on the handle he is sure, in this event, to put a
twist into his bow, Consequently, the string, when loosed, will not only travel
forward, but it will also spring over to the left and thus be liable to strike
the arm or wrist.

775In passing we may mention that with the Mediterranean loose, or three-finger
draw, used by most of the old European bowmen as well as by modern Western
archers, the wrist is commonly struck. For this reason a bracer, or arm-guard,
should always be worn as the arm may be lightly hit even when a shot is
correctly executed. With the thumb-lock, on the other hand, a bracer is not
needed since the arm is never struck unless therc is some fault in technique.


5. Sounds Emitted by Equipment

776
The variant reading taswit as-sahkm (‘emission of sound by the arrow’) for our
tasteib as-sahm (p. 116) poses the problem of deciding which of the two' is more
acceptable. Prima facie, the former seems preferable to the latter, especially
since we would normally expect taswib as-sakm to mean ‘directing the arrow
straight at the mark’, a sense which it clearly cannot have in the


ON FAULTS & INJURIES TO WHICH ARCHERS ARE EXPOSED 121

777
context. But what sounds are emitted by an arrow? There is only one sound, and
that is produced when the shaftment strikes the arrow-pass as it leaves the bow,
the cause being either the use of unsuitable or defective equipment, or an error
on the part of the archer. More precisely, it is caused by ‘twisting the grip on
loosing, a bad grasp, pinching the nock’ or by ‘too big a loop, or a bad arrow
that is defective either because it is too thin or of too weak a wood or roughly
cut in the making’ (C!, 66a-b; C?, 1o6a-b; C*, 555—562, ctc.). Practical trials
so far completed suggest that the archer’s errors said by our author to result
in raswib as-sahm do not result in the emission of any sound, but rather in low
flight. We therefore retain tagwib and take the expression to mean ‘causing the
arrow to fly low" (from lack of initial velocity) on the basis of the senses ‘to
lower’, as of the head, and ‘to descend’ indicated for forms II and V
respectively of the Arabic root from which tagzi derives.


6. ‘Predominance’ of the Lower Limb

778
‘Predominance of the leg of the bow’ (p. 118) is the best translation we can
offer of the words qiyàm rij! al-qaws. It is a difficult expression with which
Faris and Elmer had also to come to grips (Arab Archery, p. 72, n. 29). The
sense, on the other hand, seems to be fairly clear. The implication is that the
lower limb of the bow 3s the stronger. Under these circumstances the lower limb
travels faster than rhe upper when the bow is loosed, and at the instant the
arrow leaves the string the nock is too low in relation to the thumb of the
bow-hand, thereby causing the shaft—propelled by uneven thrust—to rub too much
against the thumb. A composite bow can develop such a fault even though both
limbs were correctly balanced at the time of manu- facture. It can be easily
corrected by heat treatment (above, p. 99), as we have proved by


experiment.

779
CHAPTER 22 ON ADJUSTMENTS REQUIRED BY DIFFERENT PHYSIQUES


Men vary in body and structure. They are of tall stature with long arms, long
neck and big chest, or of short stature with short arms and short neck. Or, they
may combine different characteristics of the two extremes, Thus a tall man might
have long arms and a small chest, or short arms and a big chest, and so on,
according to somatic differences which it would take too long to go into.
Sizes, at any rate, tio vary, and, since this is so, there are different methods
of shooting ;* for each of our predecessors in archery* took up whatever lay
within his own physical capacity and made no attempt to perfect that of which he
was incapable. Each of them, therefore, commended whatever was within his
capacity and limits of attainment and regarded it as right, at the same time
condemning ali else,

780Most masters (ustddin) hold that the tall man with all the perfect
characteristics of such should grasp squarely because of the length of his
fingers and the size of his grasp. It is the fimest grasp.  They say that
everyone with a long arm-span, long neck, and slight beard should squat
obliquely (yag'ud munharif") so as to set the target in line with his lett
shoulder and that he should grasp squarely. What the archer does in this case is
to place the main (here ‘mid-line of the grip’s dorsal surface’; above, p. 45)
of his bow’s grip in the middle crease of his little finger, ring-finger, and
middle finger, and in the distal crease of his left index finget.? He then tucks
the rbranjak (here, evidently, ‘belly of the grip’; but see Glossary) in to a
point the width of two fingers away from his wrist-bone, at the same time
tensing the bottom three fingers and relaxing the other two. The index finger is
then wrapped over the back of the grip (matn), and the thumb placed on top of it
` pressing squarely against the grip. Once in this position, the tip of the
thumb should be neither above nor below the level of its own base. He next locks
‘69’ and tenses the bottom three fingers of this hand, keeping the index finger
outside (i.e. to the right of) the bowstring and placing the nock so. that it is
two-thirds of the way along the proximal phalanx of the index finger. Sighting
outside the bow with both eyes together, he draws on the point where the tuft of
hair grows between the lip and chin, and then right back to the lobe of the
ear. "This draw is the misdh (sec Comment). They say this is the method of Abū
Hashim.

It is taught that a person with short arms and fingers, short neck, big beard,
big chest, and fat hands should squat facing the mark squarely and grasp
obliquely. What the archer does in the case of the oblique grasp is to place the
matn of his grip in the proximal crease "formed by the bottom three fingers! and
the distal crease of the left index finger. He then tucks the ibranjak in to a
point the width of one finger away from the wrist-bone. The rest of the
procedure is as described in the case of the tall man, except that the tip of
the right index finger is kept inside (i.c. to the left of) the string, the nock
of the arrow resting at the bottom end of the proximal phalanx of the index
finger. The archer then aims with both eyes inside the bow and draws on the
cheek. This is the bayád (see Comment) because it is the opposite of that of the
tall person.°

781Now, a tall man with long fingers grasps squarely owing to the length of his
fingers and the width of his hand, in order to prevent his finger tips from
touching the heel of the hand. On


122

782
ON ADJUSTMENTS REQUIRED BY DIFFERENT PHYSIQUES 123


account of his long neck he squats obliquely, and because of the length of his
right index finger he keeps it outside the bowstring. The short man, on the
other hand, squats directly facing the mark because of his deep chest and short
neck and grasps obliquely on account of his short fingers.  He squats ix the
frontal position to avoid striking his beard with the bowstring, and he draws on
his cheek because of the shortness of his neck. He looses without any downward
and forward thrust as he follows through (Ch. 14) because his posture as he
squats directly facing the mark is not consistent with such a movement. Once his
arrow is drawn, his draw is bayad because of the shortness of his arm-span. For
Jamshid says in his book? that, as regards the grip, there are three positions
(manazi) "for the arrowhead!: the lesser, the greater, and the injurious
(bidayaA, niháyah, mka@yah, respectively; lit. ‘initial, final and injurious
points’). His maxim is, ‘Give the tall man the lesser, which is the draw at its
shortest {awal wafa’), or “wiping the fist” (misa?  i-gabdah). Give the short
man the greater, which is the bayad, or ultimate (tammy (below). He allows the
latter to let his elbow sink down.’ This is the method of Tahir al-Balkhi.

783
«pape ee ot Bere



784

do MS OU E ED DPI

785
Square



786

Oblique

787
Birds eye view


FIG. 42. STANCE; OBLIQUE AND SQUARE (a). Used by tall man. (b), Used by short
man.

788
The archer of medium build adopts an intermediate squatting position between the
oblique and frontal so that he has the target in line with his collar-bone.* He
also adopts a grasp that lies between the oblique and the square. What he does
is to place the matn of the grip in the middie of the proximal phalanges?
half-way between the middle and proximal creases. The sbranjak of his grip he
places at a distance from the wrist-bone that would amount to the width of one
and a half fingers. When nocking, he locks ‘69’ on nock and string and allows
the bowstring to bisect the end of the right index finger. He sights with the
right eye inside the bow and the left outside, and then draws on his mouth right
to the lobe of his ear, the draw in this case being termed misáh bayag. He
follows through with a forward and downward thrust of the bow-hand and twists
with the other, but in both cases executes only half the full movement. This,
then, is the intermediate method, which is that of Ishaq ar-Raffa’.*°

Masters of olden times are quoted as saying that a master (ustad) cannot be such
until he can lengthen the short and shorten the long. Shortening the long
(taqsir at-ta3/) means that the archer grasps squarely and, by so doing,
shortens his fingers in such a way that their tips do not reach the hee! of the
hand.!! Lengthening the short (rajwřf al-qasir)!? means that he grasps obliquely
and so lengthens his fingers to go round the grip in the appropriate
manner. They likewise taught that the farthest point to which an archer should
reach when drawing should be the point at which the distal phalanx of his right
index finger comes to rest beneath the lobe of his right ear. When he looses
and, bringing his right hand into operation, opens the right index finger, its
nail should come to rest beneath the lobe of his ear. This goes for tall, short,
and medium persons alike,

789À person with a short neck should squat in the frontal position. The same
applies to a person with a protrusive chest and, again, to a person with a big
beard. Every person with any single one of these characteristics should face the
mark directly whether squatting, standing, or riding. A person with a long neck,
high, unprotrusive!? chest and small beard should squat obliquely.  The oblique
position also applies to standing and riding. If a man's fingers are short and
his palm


124 SARACEN ARCHERY

790
is long, he should square his palm and slant his fingers. If, on the other hand,
his fingers are long and his palm is short, the palm should be slanted and his
fingers squared.

There are also three positions (mandzil) on which to draw. The tall man should
draw on the tuft of hair between his lower lip and chin, the short man on his
cheek, and the man of medium build on his mouth. It has been explained that the
limit to which the draw should be taken is marked by the lower extremity of the
ear, which means to say that when one looses, the nail of the right index finger
should lie beneath the lobe of the ear. This is the soundest pronouncement on
the subject and a much-needed piece of advice which men will do well to heed,
particularly those who are serious practitioners of the art and are called
*master" 14

791Now, it is my humble opinion that since archery came into existence its
essential purpose has been to inflict injury upon one's enemy, and the greater
the power and strength of the bow and the longer the arrow, the preater the
injury inflicted. It is our opinion then that if the archer takes up an oblique
position (inbarafa) with the mark in line with his left shoulder, he will
develop more powerful traction since the joints of the left arm can be locked
more or fess in a straight line in the same horizontal plane with each bone
supporting the other. The forearm will then be firm enough to take the weight of
the bow, and it will accordingly attain its maximum power, Furthermore, if the
draw is ‘correctly !5 executed from this position, a longer arrow can be
used. To recapitulate: for the reasons we have explained the archer who uses
this technique will not only shoot more powerfully than an opponent who does
not, provided, of course, that both persons are equally strong, but he will also
draw a longer arrow which will be more effective against an enemy adopting a
different method.


The archer who, on the other hand, faces the mark directly—by which is meant one
who puts his face squarely to the mark—will experience impairment of traction
because when he comes to draw, he will bend his left arm in front of his
face. His arm, therefore, will turn and come in upon itself and, in so doing,
weaken, thereby impairing his traction and leaving him no alternative but to
draw a short arrow. The result of all this will be a reduction of his
effectiveness. An archer should, then, shoot according to the first technique if
he can do so. The reason for this lies not only in the factors we have already
mentioned as affecting the strength end power of the bow and the length of the
arrow, but also in the fact that a combatant enters the fray with his left side

792



793Fic. 43. DRAWING: OBLIQUE AND SQUARE (a). Tall man draws to point of jaw. Lock
‘69’: square.  (b). Short man draws to lobe of ear. Lock ‘69°: oblique.


ON ADJUSTMENTS REQUIRED BY DIFFERENT PHYSIQUES 125

794
‘because it enables him to shoot the enemy from under his shield without
exposing himself to the foc.!5 This way of shooting, however, can be difficult,
and, in fact, cannot be practised!?  by persons with certain physical
characteristics. This is especially true in the case of a man with a protrusive
chest, short neck or big beard, ffor such a person must, as we have said, face
the mark directly’. I myself have heard some archers condemn the technique and
thoroughly disapprove of it on aesthetic grounds, saying that it is the Persian
manner of shooting.!* But to condemn it is very much a mistake on their part
because the main object is not an elegant appearance but the effectiveness of
the weapon in repelling the enemy.

The intermediate method gives much the same degree of effectiveness as the
oblique and is universally acceptable.!? The rule for its adherents will, then,
be the intermediate, which conforms to the Apostle Muhammad's dictum: ‘In all
things the best policy is the happy medium.’

795Itis my opinion that any man whose limbs are in due proportion, whose neck is
long and supple, and whose chest is not protrusive, can exercise greater freedom
of movement and action in shooting than anyone else, The closer he is to
obliqueness, the stronger the bow he can draw and the longer the arrow. Any man
with disproportionate members, no matter who he is, will fall short of
perfection according to the measnre of his disproportions. Exactly the same
thing applies in the case of enterprise and intellectual capacity, both of which
must be commensurate with physical potential. For a man of limited enterprise
cannot equal a highly enterprising and intelligent individual. On the contrary,
in nothing will he come anywhere near him, even though his members may perhaps
be what they should.

Weapons of war must be exactly suited to the members of those who use
them. Since this is $0, the principle is all the more right and proper when
applicable to the bow because of its proven superiority over all other weapons;
for it is even as the Prophet said when bows were mentioned in his exalted
presence, ‘No weapon has ever done better (sc. for the cause of Islam) than the
bow.’ Any man of intelligence and experience, then, should have a bow to suit
his limbs, as advised in our poem,*° and the same applies to the arrow. If, for
some reason, he cannot attain perfection he should endeavour to get as near to
it as possible. Since a man cannot change the way in which human limbs are
created, he should turn his attention to adapting his weapons to the
requirements of the limbs which he has, because anything that is man-made can
easily be altered. To have an archer adjust his weapons to suit his limbs is a
more sensible and easier policy than to tax him beyond the capacity of his
members, If a man has a large palm and long fingers, we tell him to grasp
squarely to enable him to grip properly. If his fingers are too long,?!  we tell
him to thicken the grip of his bow either by a fundamental structural alteration
or by affixing a piece of leather as indicated earlier (p. 9). This is a more
sensible course than to assume the difficult task of changing his narural grasp
because of the slenderness of a bow's grip, which can be altered and adjusted,
or even be entirely rebuilt. This is the easier and more profitable policy. A
man with a small hand can be advised to adopt the reverse procedure. We tell him
to grasp obliquely,?? and if his fingers are short, we tell him to narrow the
grip of his bow.  To enable a man with a long and supple neck to sight
correctly, we tell him to sight outside the bow and gauge in that position. We
need press the point no further since we have already said enough to enable a
man of sound understanding and good common sense to grasp our meaning.

796
COMMENT 1. Basic Considerations


This useful chapter summarizes the teaching expounded earlier in the work and
introduces the reader to certain important aspects of advanced technique. The
novice, once having mastered the basic methods in which he has been trained, is
ready to proceed to the development of an individual style of shooting. The
pattern of progression is as valid today as it was in the time of

797
126 SARACEN ARCHERY


Taybughà. When he first learns to shoot, the beginner experiences a sense of
awkwardness and is more often than not confused by his attempts to memorize ail
the various details essential to sound performance. With practice most points
become a matter of automatic behaviour, and when some degree of proficiency has
been attained, he 1s almost sure to feel the need for certain minor
variations. He should be encouraged to satisfy this need under the watchful eye
of a competent master who will prevent him from developing some radical error
which at a later stage it might be difficult to correct. A good master
thoroughly familiar with all possible variations should quickly perceive his
pupils’ problems and advise them to take up certain styles calculated to bring
them to a mastery of their art.

798The need for variations arises almost entirely from the physical characteristics
of the individual archer, and, as Taybughi so rightly observes, no two men are
exactly alike. Basically, it is not.  unreasonable to consider, as Taybughà
does, the two extremes, between which limits wide variations can be found,


2. The Draw

799
In shooting a bow the archer has what amounts to a foresight formed by the
combination of the arrow's point and the side of the bow. The manner in which he
uses this sight depends on whether he aims ‘inside’ the bow or ‘outside’, but in
either case there is a definite object to be aligned with the target. A trained
archer may not be conscious of what he is doing, and it may even be said that
alignment of his sight should be a reflex operation. Since there is no
backsight, it is essential, for the attainment of constant direction, that the
tail of each and every arrow always be drawn to the same point. If the point is
allowed to vary, the line of the arrow in relation to the line of sight will
also vary, and shooting wili of necessity be erratic.

The modern archer positively ‘anchors'\—to use the accepted technical term—his
drawing hand either under his chin or against the side of his mouth according to
his adopted technique.  There are many variations, but what is essential and
common to all is that the archer should feel his drawing hand firmly pressed
into place in the chosen position. This method of anchoring is relatively modern
and has been successfully developed over the last century or so. By contrast,
there is the traditional Japanese technique whereby the drawing hand is brought
back beyond the head and roughly above the point of the right shoulder. In this
case there is no positive lodgment of the hand. A constant position can
nevertheless be achieved by the shaft’s lightly touching against the cheek, and
with practice an unvarying length of draw is attainable. The Mameluke technique
with which we are here concerned seems to be more akin to the Japanese than to
that of the modern Western archer. In other words, there appears to be no anchor
as understood by the latter. However, that may be, ‘anchor’ is a conventent term
to apply to the position of the draw- hand at the moment of loosing, and for
this reason we shall use it in the present context in

800t sense.


3. Anchoring

801
‘Drawyng to the eare he [Homer] prayseth greatly, whereby men shoote both
stronger and longer: drawynge therefore to the eare is better than to drawe at
the breste... Holdynge must not be longe, for it bothe putteth a bowe in
ieopardy, & also marrcth a mans shoote . . k (Ascham, p. 105).


Drawing to the lobe of the ear is commended by the author of Arab Archery as a
time-honoured practice compatible with accurate and effective shooting, and
drawing to the white spot between the lobe of the car and the beard is declared
to be almost as good (p. 51). Neither of these choices, however, he regards as
the best. On the contrary, he advocates drawing to the end of the right jaw-bone
and running the arrow along the lips or moustaches.,

802
ON ADJUSTMENTS REQUIRED BY DIFFERENT PHYSIQUES 127


Whatever the options open to the individual, there is one rule from which the
archer should not depart if he is to draw a strong bow: he must not anchor at a
point below the level of his shoulders. For military archery the ear has always
been a favoured position. To draw to the ear does not necessarily imply that the
hand should be in contact with it, but rather that it should be brought back as
far as the limit set by the ear. Contact was not always made by the drawing
hand, and, in fact, the anchor-point often lay below the lobe as it was
obviously to do in the case of Taybugha’s tall man, whose shaft would be drawn
at a level half-way between lip and chin until the drawing hand came as far back
as the lobe of his ear. It is not stated that at this stage the shaft should
lightly touch the face, or that some part of the drawing hand should be in
contact with the jaw or neck. Nevertheless, something of the kind would seem to
be a highly desirable, if not necessary, safeguard against any lateral variation
in the position of the arrow’s nock. It should also be noted that the tall man
would need to have his head turned slightly to the right of his line of sight in
order to shoot in comfort (Fig. 42).

803At the other extreme, the short man is advised to draw with the shaft at a level
which would be roughly that of the tip of his nose. Since he is to stand or
squat squarely, he can face the target directly, but this attitude will prevent
him from setting his shoulders in line with the mark. It naturally follows that
he must angle his left arm at the shoulder as he trains his bow on the target.
Angling of the arm in this way will not only prevent him from exploiting his
strength to the Tull as the tall man can do, but it will also affect his methed
of gripping the handle over and above the degree to which it is already affected
by adjustments necessitated by the physical dimensions of his hand
(Fig. 42b). For the rest, the anchor-point of his drawing hand will be on, or
near, the lobe of his ear.


4. Terminology

804
The enigmatic yocabulary used to denote the various positions of the draw
presents a problem to which the best solution seems to be that which we are
about to propose. Based on a careful study of all relevant details known to us
at the time of writing, it takes account not only of information contained in
our Chapters II and 23, but also of data located as follows in CD: (i) C1, 44b;
C3, 73a; C^, 36b; D', 32a; D?, 59b; fii) C!, 73a-b; C?, 116a-117a; C3, 61a-b;
(iii) C! 68a-69b; C}, 1092-1115; C?, 572-582; D, 49a-51a; D*, 732-742.

The need for brevity precludes here the scrutiny of minutiae. Certain
observations must, however, be made. Firstly, in certain fundamental respects
the evidence of (1), into which textual corruption almost certainly enters,
directly contradicts that of (ii), which more closely agrees with what our
accepted text of the present chapter has to offer. Secondly, in one important
respect, viz. the expression applicable to the draw prescribed for an archer of
medium proportions, the evidence of (ii) is in conflict with that of (iii), and,
in fact, the same discrepancy—bayad in the one case as against sawäd in the
other—will, upon comparison of the present chapter with the next, be found to
exist in our own text. Thirdly and lastly, from the literature of which we have
first-hand knowledge we can only conclude that certain archers or authors, or
both, either used identical terms in different senses, or else misunderstood or
misapplied their terminology, or give the appearance of having done so, because
of changes in usage or extensions of meaning.

805Whatever the uncertainties of interpretation in respect of particulars, it is
our opinion that from a general standpoint there are two classes of terminology
to be distinguished: (2) that pertaining to the position of the arrowhead in
relation to the grip of the bow, viz, bidaya, kifáyah (above, p. 57), niháyah,
nikāyah; (b) that bearing on the movement and position of the drawing hand in
relation to the face, viz. (al-)bayád, (as-)sawdd, kashf (al-)bayád, n(V ?)sah
al-qabdah|(al-) bayad}(as-} sawad. :

A major hurdle in the way of our immediate disentanglement of this
terminological skein proved to be the ambiguity of gabdah, which prima facie
could be taken in the context as (a) ‘grip,

806
128 SARACEN ARCHERY


handle’ of the bow; (b) ‘bow-hand’; (c) ‘drawing hand’, After the elimination,
on technical grounds, of alí but the last of these meanings, the next step was
to determine the nature of the evident, but perplexing, contrast between bayad
(lit. ‘white, whiteness’) and sazad (lit. ‘black, blackness’) which—again on
technical grounds—we felt obliged to dissociate from the grip of the bow or the
bow-hand in favour of the drawing hand or face. Since there is an obvious
contrast between the ‘clean’ and bearded parts of the face, we finally decided
that it was to these that our terms referred. The last major problem lay in
mVsah. The meaning of the root msk ‘wipe, rub’ being clear enough, it was a
question of settling for one of three different MS readings, viz, misáh, masáh,
or massáh, the last being least common. On a number of grounds we decided in
favour of the first, which, by analogy with kashf in the expression k, al-bayàd
(ii, below), we take to be a verbal noun. In this verbal noun there inheres the
idea of ‘endeavouring to wipe one thing against another', and how it fits into
the picture will be seen in the explanations we now offer:

807



808FIG. 44. GRASPS: SQUARE AND OBLIQUE (a). Square. Arrowhead is bidáyah.
(b). Oblique. Arrowhead is nihdyah,


(i) The tail man draws his shaft on the tuft of hair between lip and chin, then
passes his hand over his beard to reach the anchor-point below the ear at the
angle of the jaw. His action in so doing is an attempt, against the pull of the
bow, to wipe his drawing hand (misa I-gabdahk) on his beard, or alternatively,
to wipe his beard (misah* s-sawad) with his drawing hand. Misdh used absolutely
would appear to be an abbreviated form of one or other of the two. At the other
end of things the arrowhead is in the first position (bidáyaA), safely
projecting perhaps as much as two inches beyond the bow because of his use of
the square grasp (Fig. 44a).

809(ii) The short man draws on his cheek (baydd), then reaches back to his
anchor-point marked by the lobe of his ear. His action in so doing is that of
revealing his cheek, or the ‘white’ (kaskf?  i-bayad). His arrowhead is in the
ultimate position (mhdyah), or as far back as it can safely be drawn, since his
use of the oblique grasp enables him to bring it on to the side of the bow's


grip (Fig. 44b).

810
ON ADJUSTMENTS REQUIRED BY DIFFERENT PHYSIQUES 129


case usually being described as bidáyah. For this there could be several
explanations, every one of which would be sheer hypothesis and make tedious
reading. It is sufficient to say that misah® (I-) bayad, whether it be as
suggested above or taken as a kind of compound expression incorporat- ing misāh
from (i) and bayád from (ii) above, makes perfectly good sense to us. As regards
the arrowhead, it is in the position that may be described as ‘just right"
(Exfayak).

811Finally, if any archer, whatever his proportions, exceeds the specified draw by
reaching back beyond the lobe of his ear, his arrowhead may come inside the grip
and be in a position to do him


harm (nikáyah).  5. Table: Somatic Differences and Technique

812
TALL MEDIUM SHORT School: Abii Hashim Ishaq Tahir Posture: Oblique Intermediate
“Square Grasp: Square Intermediate Oblique Lock: Index finger outside String
divides index Tip of index finger string finger inside string Aim: Outside bow
R. eye inside, I. eye Inside bow outside bow Drawing- point: Between lip and
chin On mouth On cheek Term: Misah, m. al-qabdah Misah (I-)bayád Bayad, kashf*
(I-)bayág (m. as-savád) (Some: m. as-sawad) Position of artowhead: First
Intermediate Ultimate


i.e. bidáyah ("lesser") ie. &fáyah (‘standard’) ie. nthayah (‘greater’)
Anchor-point: Angie of jaw Below lobe of ear At lobe of ear

813
CHAPTER 23


THE SYSTEMS OF THE GREAT MASTERS (A'IMMAH) OF ARCHERY!

814
i The system of Abii Hashim was as follows. When bracing the bow, he would put
the matn of the grip in the middle of the left palm and place the siyah of the
leg of his bow under the toes of his left foot. His right palm he would apply to
the neck of the bow along with the bowstring and give one push so that the loop
would fall into the nock. He would incline the bow on account of the slope of
the neck (i.e. he held the bow at the slant and not vertically, the degree of
inclina- tion depending on the slope of the neck).

He used the position of acute obliqueness so as to put the mark directly in line
with his left shoulder and sighted with both eyes outside (i.e. to the left of)
the bow, for he was tall of stature,” ong-nec ked, long in the forearm, and
long-fingered. He used the square grasp and, when gripping, would place the matn
of the bow in the middle creases of the little finger, ring-finger, and middle
finger of his Jeft hand and in the distal crease of his index finger, with the
ibranjak of the bow tucked into a point the width of two fingers away from his
wrist-bone.

815The nock ( fag) of the arrow he would place in the distal crease of his right
index finger and middle finger and support the notch (kaz) with the pad of his
thumb. He would push the shaft forward with his right hand and bring back his
left so that nocking took place at a point between his "left! nipple and his
liver (i.e. in the area of the navel).! When locking, he would place the
bowstring in the distal crease of his thumb and fasten. his thumb on the middle
finger. His right index finger would be loosely on the thumb with its tip
outside (i.e. to the right of) the bowstring.

He would use the lesser draw (wafa’ biddyah) and draw the shaft on to the tuft
of hair between his lips and chin, keeping all (ic. hands, shoulders, and elbow)
in a straight line in the same horizontal plane (‘ald khat; al-tstiva’). Upon
loosing, he would follow through with a forward and downward thrust of his bow
hand and complete the movement by striking his shoulder- blade with the siyah of
his bow (see frontispiece; the archer right centre has just completed the
movement), By doing this an archer can determine the length of the bow ‘in
relation to the length of his arm’. With his right hand he would give a full
twist ( farkah; above, p. 66) so that his right index finger would come to rest
beneath the lobe of the ear.

816
Hi


Tahir al-Balkhi's system was the reverse of Abū Hashim’s because he was short
"with a short armspan!,s short fingers, a plump hand, short neck, big beard, and
wide chest. He squatted in the frontal position and placed the mark in line with
his collar-bone, using the oblique grasp. The matn of his bow he set in the
proximal crease of his little finger, ring-finger, and middle finger of the left
hand and in the middle crease of the index finger, with the ibranjak of his bow
tucked in to a point one finger’s width away from his wrist-bone. When nocking,
he would dispose the

817
130


THE SYSTEMS OF THE GREAT MASTERS OF ARCHERY 131

818
nock of his arrow in the same manner as that already described above. When
locking, he would place the bowstring in the distal crease of the right thumb
and, having fastened the tip of the thumb on the middle finger, lay the index
finger gently on the thumb with the finger-tip inside the bowstring. He would
draw on io his cheek in the wafa’ bayad position (p. 128) and hold his left hand
still. He would bring his right thumb into a position beneath the lobe of his
ear with his finger outside it (i.e. the lobe), and, had a drop of moisture
dripped from the sky, it would not have gone down berween® the thumb and right
index finger. The loose was accomplished without formation of the crescent with
thumb and index finger (taklil; p. 64) or forward and downward thrust as he
followed through. The movement would have been incompatible with his position
directly facing the mark. Because of the shortness of his neck and the size of
his beard, Tahir sighted with both eyes together inside the bow.



819

a. Square b. Intermediate c. Oblique

820
Fria, 45. METHODS OF TRE MASTERS Copied from British Museum MS Or. 9838,
fols. 16a~I7a.


i

821
The system of Ishaq ar-Raffa’ was a compromise between the two methods already
described, for he was of medium build and would squat in a position between that
of acute obliqueness and the frontal. What he did was to bring the target’ in
line with part of his collar-bone. When grasping, he would place the marn of the
grip between the proximal and middle creases, right in


` the centre of the proximal phalanges at the base of the three lower fingers of
his left hand, and in

822
the distal crease of his index finger, tucking the ibranjak in to a point one
and a half fingers away from the wrist-bone. He used to place the bowstring in
the distal phalanx of the thumb and mount the right index finger gently on the
thumb with its tp on the string itself, so that the line of the string would
bisect the tip of the index finger. He would draw on his mouth and come to full
draw in the misdh® s-sawad position (? m. bayad; above, p. 129). He would
snatch* and with half the full movement follow through ‘with a forward and
downward thrust of the bow-hand? and half twist with the other to bring the
finger-nail of the right index finger into position under the lobe of his ear.


132 SARACEN ARCHERY iv Because of his desire to develop a suitable technique,
at-Tabari ‘who was trained in all three systems! ° squatted in the same way as
Ishaq, adopted Tahir’s grasp, braced and sighted after the fashion of Abii
Hashim, used a lock that was a compromise between that of Tahir and that of

823
Ishaq and drew on the mouth after the manner of Ishaq . . .!? At-Tabari is the
author of the Kitab al-idah (for K. al-wadih, “The Clear Book’).


COMMENT 1. The Schools of Archery

824
From a comparison of some of the more important treatises relevant to the
subject it is apparent—and certain of our observations on preceding chapters
will have led the reader to suspect as much—that, in Islamic archery literature
generally, there are discrepant versions of the teachings of Abū Hashim, Tahir,
and Ishaq. In particular, the account of their systems contained in the
foregoing chapter is at variance with that of at-Tabari as transmitted in his
Kita al-wadih (26a-46b; Ist., 19b-34b), which, incidentally, as the source of
many of the ascriptions appearing in Arab Archery, accounts for some points of
difference between that work and this,

Familiarity with the technical literature and an awareness of the Islamic
predilection for a personal originator of almost any teaching or doctrine
combine to make us highly sceptical of the authenticity of ascriptions which the
absence of objective criteria makes it difficult or impossible to control. The
emergence of personal schools of archery, we suspect, represents the
organization of teaching into a coherent system, in which names enjoying the
sanction of tradition are used either to legitimize current practice or to
promulgate new methods. That Abi Hashim, Tahir, and Ishaq were historical
persons, we have no reason to doubt, but whether any of them was the real
originator of a technique or system, or merely the leading exponent of a
technique or system as taught and practised in a given geographical area at a
given time-~and this is not unlikely— is just one of the questions for which we
have, as yet, no positive answer.

825In our treatise these three Great Masters emerge as ideal specimens of two
physical extremes and a golden mean and, as such, seem no more than a
methodological convenience for an exposi- tion of the author's teaching. In the
Wadih, on the other hand, it is deducible from the systems ascribed to them that
none of them was a perfect example of such physical types. On this and other
grounds it is legitimate to surmise that their somatic differences were not so
absolute as portrayed in aftertimes and were indeed of less consequence than one
might be led to suppose.

While physical characteristics are of evident importance to some facets of
shooting technique— the nature of one's grasp, for instance—they are by no means
the whole story. It must be remem- bered that from ancient times the archer in
combat more often than not protected his person with armour which, to a greater
or lesser degree according to its nature, added to his bulk or deprived him of
the unrestricted use of his body, or both, To illustrate, let us consider the
helmet.  Many of the earlier surviving specimens of Turkish and Persian helmets
are equipped with nasals, or nose-bars, that could be slid up or down in their
fittings and locked in the desired position by means of a threaded bolt (Stone,
Glossary of Arms and Armor, s.v. Armor, pp. 36-51, and figs. 50-58, 61-64). A
nasal might extend down the face as far as the wearer’s chin, and, when shooting
a bow in an acutely oblique position like that of Abü Hashim, the archer would
not have been able to turn his head in comfort more than about forty-five
degrees towards the target. If his drawing hand was in contact with the side of
his face as he loosed, it is difficult to see how the string could avoid
catching the nasal and ruining the shot, to say nothing of any other
inconvenience or injury that might result if his head was turned too much. He
might, of

826
Ao OLoA DMA Uf LI1D URLAL MASILEKS Ur AKUREKY 133


course, remove the nasal or Jock it in the raised position, but he could not
always count on having the opportunity of doing so. Similar problems could
obviously arise from the wearing of armour, be it plate or mail, and both the
Wadi and Arab Archery leave us in no doubt that the Muslim archers of the Middle
East recognized its importance as a factor in the choice of posture (e.g. Wadih,
34a-b, 39b-402, 45b-46b; Arab Archery, pp. 81 ff.). Tahir’s adherents, we are
told, rejected Abū Hashim's position of acute obliqueness because of the
string’s liability to catch protrusive items of armour. To face the target
directly, on the other hand, had in their view the advantage of eliminating this
hazard and at the same time not restricting the archer to one coat of mail
(zardiyyah). It did not, however, permit, as did Abū Hashim’s position, the use
of the kind of shield with which Khorasanians were wont to protect themselves
while actually shooting, nor did it admit of a powerful draw. Both these
disadvantages could be overcome by the use of the intermediate position. In view
of Taybughà's emphasis on archery in warfare it is surprising that he says
nothing of such considerations, for they must have been of greater importance
than physique as witness the fact that today most Western archers, regardless of
build, stand sideways to the target.

827With the crystallization of theoretical teaching into three systems at-Tabari,
it would seem, came face to face with the obvious problem of the individual who
fell neatly into none of the three stereotyped classes of physique for which the
systems catered. His solution was simple and



828

Fig. 46. SHOOTING WHEN WEARING A HELMET Note tahlil and kharrah.

829
94 )4&ASAR deed ALANA LAM L


characteristic of the Islamic way of thinking. Skilfully avoiding innovation
which could well discredit him, he reconciled the claims of individuality with
those of ‘orthodoxy’ and tradition by the application of the eclectic
principle. In so doing he satisfied an obvious need and set a useful example,
thereby earning himself recognition as a Master—in the sense of founder of a
school—in his own right. :

830The four schools, or systems (madhahib), of archery based on allegiance to the
teaching of a Master (imám) are strikingly reminiscent of the four orthodox
schools (madhahkib) of Islamic law, each perpetuating the doctrine of a Master
(idm) and his disciples. Since the systems of our text are, as already
indicated, not those described by at-Tabari, we may well suspect that the
respectable framework of orthodoxy underpinned by time-honoured names is being
used as a cloak for the promulgation of what is either the author's own teaching
or teachings reflecting current practice.


2. At-Tabari’s Technique

831
If we discount the misleading matter of discrepant ascriptions, the practice of
at-Tabari as laconically recorded in our text does not, so far as the record
goes, fundamentally diverge from that described in the Wadik (59a-62b; Ist.,
452-48b). The only major difference concerns his grasp on the bow which
was.,from what he himself says, intermediate and not oblique as stated
above. Although the two MSS do not wholly agree, that of Istanbul being more
corrupt than that of the British Museum, we nevertheless venture the following
account of his methods:


"Whether standing or squatting, I prefer to take a slightly oblique position and
set the target in line with my left eye. In this I follow the system of Ishaq
ar-Raffa’. When bracing, the middle phalanges of my left index finger and middle
finger are in contact with my right knee. When nocking, I first set the notches
(alag at-taftoig/al-fuvág) of my arrows on the middle phalanx of my middle
finger and firmly hold the bottom of the notches with the tips of my thumb and
index finger. I next push the arrow sharply forward until the string strikes the
base of my thumb and index finger without at any time allowing the shaft (badan)
of my arrow to leave the string. Then, without looking, I bring the nock back,
slip it on the string, and Iock ‘63’.  Lodging the string in the crease of my
thumb, I have my index finger on top of the thumb and the string opposite the
mid-point of the very tip of the index finger. In the lock, I have the cusps
(daffatáni, sing. daffah) of the nock between the proximal phalanx and middle
crease of my index finger. In this I follow the system of Tahir al-Balkhi.

832In grasping the bow, I set the marn (above, p. 45) of the grip between the
crease formed at the base of the four fingers and the middle crease thereof. In
this I follow the system of Abū Hashim, The upper end of the grip’s belly
(ibranjak) I place between the two phalanges [ sic; it must be ‘joints’] of my
thumb in conformity with Tahir’s teaching, and the lower part one finget's width
from the wrist-bone in accordance with that of Ishiq.

When aiming, I displace the lower siyah to the right and bring it back to
vertical with a twist of my forearm at the very moment I begin to draw, and in
this I follow Tahir. Using my bow-hand to focus, I direct the tip of my
arrowhead (ra’s an-nagl) on to the centre of the mark.  I aim with both eyes
together outside the bow and, in sighting, I depend essentially on my right eye,
though I use it in conjunction with my left. In this I follow Ishaq. I do not
lower my left arm for short range, nor do I raise it for long, On the contrary,
the proximal phalanx of my left thumb will be in line with the end of my
shoulder throughout the draw and remain absolutely level, moving neither upwards
for long range nor downwards for short.

833In drawing, I execute one uninterrupted movement, as taught by Tahir, and bring
back my arrow directly in line with the parting dividing my lips with no
deviation either upwards or downwards, as taught by Isháq. When the arrowhead
reaches the ibranjak, I pause for the

count of one or two for as long as it takes [reading b1-gadr (Ist.) for ba'd]
for the arrow to settle

834
THE SYSTEMS OF THE GREAT MASTERS OF ARCHERY 135


and be trained on the mark. I then take my hand from the string to a point in
line with my shoulder, and, at that very moment of loosing, I disengage with a
twist of the hand (farkah) and without too sharp a pull on the string lest my
index finger catch any part of the nock or shaft. I throw out my chest and left
arm until the ends of my shoulder-blades meet. In this I follow Tahir...’

835
CHAPTER 24


ON THE ARCHER’S NEED TO RECOGNIZE HIS FAULTS AND KNOW THE CORRECT USE OF HIS
ARMS

836
The right arm is to archery what a leader is to men because it is the source of
all the might and grace of an archer’s shooting. Likewise, it is from this arm
that his shooting derives its effective- ness and penetrative power. It must,
therefore, be carefully watched. His left arm must also receive equal care and
attention since this arm is to archery what a foundation is to a building.  For,
should an archer be ever so meticulous in his care for the right arm, but a
little careless of the left, that small degree of carelessness would vitiate all
his diligence in his care for the right.  Conversely, should he be ever so
meticulous in his care for the left arm and be a little careless of the right,
that small degree of carelessness would, again, vitiate all his diligence in his
care for the left. The reason for this is that if right and wrong are combined,
the result is two wrongs. If the archer, therefore, detects any flaw or failing
in his shooting, he should proceed to set things 1o rights by first examining
his bow and arrows. Should he find in them any imperfection, he should not shoot
with them until he has put them in order. If, on the other hand, he can find
nothing wrong in that direction, he should consider his body and correct
anything that may have gone wrong with it without his realizing.

One thing I have noticed in my own experience! is that some days an archer may
shoot correctly with weapons and limbs alike in perfect shape, and yet, on
others, find there are flaws and not much accuracy in his shooting. Again, on
other days he will find that for no obvious reason he will achieve a higher
standard of accuracy than that which it is in him, or within his usual power, to
attain. ‘I have gone into this point and often asked experts in archery, doctors
of theology!? and sages to tell me the reason for this, but have never had any
explanation apart from that given me by a certain saintly person who observed,
‘Don’t you know that there are two kinds of day to Fate—one that is for you, and
one that is against you?’ I praised God and thanked the man for his explanation.

837Overmuch shooting can sometimes stupefy an archer. What happens is that he goes
on shooting for days without taking a single day off and then finds himself
befuddled by it. He tries hard to achieve accuracy, but fails because he has
used his limbs so much that fatigue and stiffness have set in, and he is
overcome by a kind of boredom and irritation caused by a surfeit of shooting.
For this malady I have never known any remedy other than shooting at neither
target nor mark.  What the archer should do in this case is to stand on a high
place and shoot into the air, giving his eye and mind to what he is doing with
his arms and not to any particular target. If he can take up flight shooting and
compete with himself for distance, he will find it the best possible cure.  He
should carry on doing this for some days until he recovers his ability to aim,
regains his accuracy, and gets rid of his mental confusion without any loss of
practice, This piece of advice is an excellent tip for an archer who applies
himself assiduously to target shooting. The best way, in fact, for a target
shooter to practise is for him to shoot and rest on alternate days, for if he
does so, he will not become dazed, fatigued, or bored, and he will continually
improve in everything on which he expends his energies.


136

838
British Museum, Add. 24489, fol, va


PLATE ONE Ornamental Bookplate.  The inscription inside the medallion indicates
that this

839
rane Af IT ache AT nue ls Gen ee ett ^



840

PLATE FOUR

841



842British Museum, 152076-1770(32


Portrait of Hulagu.  Detail from Persian miniature, early sixteenth century.
Note length of bow and slight reflex in grip.

843



844


Pd s

845
P) ATES FIVE (below) Arrowheads.  A variety contained in a single quiver from
[ndia. The crescent heads were intended for shooting birds on the wing and were
also used against unprotected troops. The blunt,


& six (above)

846
conical heads were used in hunting birds and small animals in trees.  Note the
armour-piercing yaghlig on the left-hand side (fourth from



847



848
bottom).


Bowstring Loop Knots

849
Top: A massive Mon; bowstring for a very h bow made from a thin of a hemp-like
vegetat fibre.


Centre: Sino-Tatar bo string made from rami with separate end loop Where the
knots rest í the string-bridges the string is bound with tl silver wire.

850
Bottom: String from

Northern India. The 1 skein is made from ni strands of twisted gut the separate
end loops fone only shown! are’

851



852



853British Museum (Natural History) ATE SEVEN A. Thumb-rings.  ; Turkish—nephrite
Persian—carnelian


Turkish—jasper Moghui—mocca stone

854
Persian—agate


Britigh Alusetm TE SEVEN B Thumb-tings. : ove: Moghui—ornamentai Chinese—jade
Moghul—ornamental white jade with jewels white jade, rubies and in gold inlay.

855
emeralds in gold inlay.


NISL tem

856
British Museum


The Draw of ‘69° and the Grip of *30".

857Lokapala, or tomb figure, of eighth century from China shows how widespread were
the


techniques of the Eastern archers.

858



859Reconstruction to show possible original appearance.



860

From a Private Colle.

861
PLATE NINEA & B. Gold Finger-tips.  Phoenician, c. fifth century 8.c. The
Phoenicians used


a two-finger draw, similar to what is now called the

862
Flemish loose. The holes around the base suggest they were stitched to a glove
or to thongs that led to a wrist strap. There is controversy over the use of
these articles.



863



864
PLATE TEN The Sasanid Khusraw Nushirvin Displaying

his Prowess.

865Persian miniature, c. A.D. 1300, from a copy of the Shah Nameh,


PLATE ELEVEN Mounted Archers Engaging Defenders on a Wall.

866Detail from MS Arab 161, fol. r12v, A.D. 1307-8.

Now knotted reins in front of sai tlo

867



868PLATE TWELVE Mounted Archer.  Detail from the battle between Alexander and
Darius.  Herat 1525. (Gift of Alexander Smith Cochran.) Note



869



870
Topkapi Mriewn H,


PLATE THIRTEEN Sultan Murad I] Shooting at the Qabag.  From MS dated between
1579 and 1585.

871



872



873



874
p anoo MY POF PPA Sp Moy Be a hee ola o ae Were, Eo onde | Ws orsi Ned o Usb V
eat



875

dHibtorirgsue Nanosa. MS Ar. oboe. 7 rete PLATE FOURTEEN Mounted Archers, The
right-hand archer is usine the hunak? rechniaue.

876



877Biblioteca Comunale Palermo


PLATE FIFTERN Georgians Shooting at the Mast.  From the original drawing by
Father Castelli, c. 1630.

878



879


Brush Afrenius. Add, 774, fol. 00;

880
PLATE SIXTEEN Archers Attacking a Fort.  Note positions of the draw. Two
archers, lower right



881



882

Lugo. Siman Collection, Mamchestor Museum

883
PLATE SEVENTEEN Korean Arrow-guide.  Note holes for attaching a thong in the
rear end.


j

884
PLATE EIGHTEEN



885



886
Reproduction of the ‘Superb’ by Edward McEwen.  t. The unbraced how >
Strung. x. At full draw of


CHAPTER 25 MISCELLANEOUS TECHNIQUES AND DEVICES

887
i On Shooting an Enemy in a Well


The way to do this is to stand on the edge of the well as though you were
standing to the mark and to draw as though you were shooting at that mark. When
you come to the end of ‘the first half of?  your draw,! and your right hand is
at your "left ? shoulder, you tuck your head in under your right forearm, tilt
your left arm downwards as you bring your arrow to ‘full’ draw, take aim, and
shoot at him. Should he have any arrows and shoot at you, he will not hit you
whereas your arrows will be right on target and finish him off. If he has a
spear, he will certainly not hit you.?

888
ii On Shooting from the Top of a Fortress


To shoot at someone moving round a fortress, aim in the same way as you would
from the top of a well. Again, tuck your head under your right forearm and tilt
your left arm downwards, take aim at your enemy, and shoot him. That is what you
do if he is at the bottom of the fortress and shooting from beneath a
shield. This can only be achieved by a great deal of practice and experience.

889On Shooting a Horseman in Battle*


To engage a horseman in a ‘fixed’ 5 head-on position, you should sight your
bow-hand on the horse’s forehead and shoot. If your arrow flies above the actual
mark, it will strike the rider, while if it falls short, it will pierce the
horse’s chest. If your shooting is accurate, it will, of course, hit the
animal’s forehead. If you have a side view of him in a fixed position, you sight
your hand on his buttock. If the arrow flies high, it will go into him, while if
it falls short, it will pierce the horse’s flank. If he is moving and going to
ride past you, you shoot in front of him by the length of another horseman or
slightly more according to the speed at which he is moving.

890
iv On Determining Whether an Arrow is Fast or Slow


To do this, you stand still and aim at a mark sixty bows’ distance away (about
75 yds.) and then shoot. From the moment the arrow leaves the bow till the time
it drops at the mark you count. If, by then, you have counted six, your
performance is average. 1f you count less, your shaft is fast; if you count
more, it is slow.**

891
137


138 JARAL GIN ANULAN 1

892
v On the Assessment of Grouping


To discover how well he is grouping, an archer should set up an object five
spans? ‘in diameter!  (about 38 in.) at sixty bows’ distance and shoot. If he
can concentrate his arrows in that object, his grouping is good.

893vi On Ensuring a Low Trajectory

For this purpose you take two staves, each of the height to which you can reach,
and set them

894up five cubits apart across the centre of a short range (ulki; see Comment). You
then take a rope,


fasten it to them,® and shoot. If your arrows fly under the rope? to the mark,
their trajectory is sufficiently low (Jag), whereas if they go over it, their
trajectory is too high (murtafi).

895
vii On Determining Dexterity

Quickness and ease in using your hands are a commendable asset in battle. If you
wish to determine your dexterity and rate of shooting, you take three arrows and
stand and shoot over sixty bows' distance. If you can shoot the third and only
see the dust of the first after that third arrow has already left your hand, you
are fast enough. If you can't, you must practise holding the arrows all together
between your fingers and shoot in this way. You keep on practising until you
achieve your goal.

896
viii On the Razor-arrow (Sahm al-müs)


This is a battle stratagem. You get a war arrow and bore a hole down the centre
of the notch (kdz).19* Younext get the smith to make you some small pieces of
metal the sizeof the notch and on these you put an edge as fine as that of a
razor. They should have a tang (sin) to fit the hole you have drilied in the
notch of your arrow. They look like this: <> Y. You equip your quiver with a
number of arrows of this type, and when you have a first-class archer to deal
with, you get some eagle quills and, having cut them into lengths as long as the
width of two fingers and split them down one side, you then fit them over the
bowstring at the nocking-point and use them to Shoot a razor-atrow at your
archer. If he picks the arrow up and shoots it back at you, it will sever his
bowstring and put a stop to his shooting. Whereupon, you can move in on him with
all speed to do with him what you will. At the right time and place this is a
handy device.  (Fig. 47.)

897
ix On the Nochless Arrow


To shoot nockiess arrows at the enemy, you take a strong iron link (zaradah) and
bind it into the bowstzing. As for the arrows, you cut away the part containing
the notch and thin down the end so that it will fit into the link on the
string. You can then lock and shoor. If accurate, it will do its work, If not,
you will very likely have shot an arrow which the enemy, if not acquainted with
missiles of this type, will be unable to shoot back at you.

898Some archers use loops of twine instead of +4 iinks—one for each arrow. In such
a case the loop is folded in two around the bowstring and used to shoot a
nockless arrow. This method is


MISLELLANBUUS LÉGHNIQUES AND DEVICES 139

899
not as obvious as the first because the ring flies off unobserved along with the
arrow. (Fig. 47.)  Others use a short tube (judbah) of iron, copper, l'or
bonc??? just big enough to take arrow nocks and as long as the width of two
fingers. One end should be stopped!** and fitted with a silk tassel to keep it
from slipping out of the drawing hand. The julbak is then slotted lengthwise as
far as the half-way mark, the slot being just wide enough to take the
bowstring. To use this device, they proceed as follows. First, the bowstring is
inserted, then the nockpiece of the arrow is cut off, and the arrow placed in
the julbah. The archer can then lock and shoot. It is a really cunning device.
(Fig. 47-)

A julbah is also perfectly suitable for use with an arrow of the concealed razor
type. You can split the nock and, having worked the razor into a two-edged blade
like a spearhead, fit it down the centre of the fissure.‘ Once it has been
inserted, the nock is bound back over it, and the arrow kept until needed. When
the occasion arises, you can shoot it in a juibahk without your bowstring's ever
entering the notch. This is a far more effective arrow than the first fin which
the razor is fitted with a tang!,!^ and it is less obvious to the enemy, for he
will not detect the trick.

900



901/



902

Nockless Arrow Julbah with Razor using cord loop Fig. 47. RAZOR- AND NOCKLEss
ARROWS

903
x On Shooting Iron Pellets and the Incendiary Egg!**


These missiles form part of the repertory of devices that are of value in battle
and siege operations. When the occasion demands, the pellets (bundug) are heated
to glowing point in a fire and used as incendiaries. Along with the pellet one
uses other kinds of projectile made out of naphtha. Thus an egg may be drained
and filled with resin or some naphtha compound which can then be ignited and
shot either at the enemy himself or at some fortress in which bales of cotton
have been used to block breaches,?? such as we have heard was done at the siege
of Acre (below, p. 143). To shoot flaming pellets on dark nights is one of the
most effective stratagems

904
140 SARACEN ARCHERY


that can be used against an army. For this purpose a copper tube (julbak)
‘expanding into an inverted cone! is used. One end of it should be a snug fit
for an iron pellet, while the other, which is smaller (sic; ‘bigger’ is
required), should be just big enough to take the egg funnelwise— for which
purpose it is to be used. Both are mounted on the foreshaft like a scroll.! An
arrow that is to be used in this way should not be fletched, but have a hole
bored in it near the nock.!* Through this hole a cord should be threaded with
which to tie the arrow to the bowstring so that it cannot fly free when
shot. With another cord the arrow is tied to the grip, but not so tightly that
it will held fast when shot. Some suitable packing is put into the tube to
prevent the end of the arrow from being burned. (Fig. 48.) If the pellets are
kept small and shot in this way they can be used to great effect against an
enemy and be fatal to beasts of burden and persons not wearing armour.

905



906Fic, 48. EGG-AND-PELLET (The funnel is shown in cross-section.)


For shooting pellets one may also make a steel or copper guide (mirar) of a
similar type to that called the ‘king-guide’ (Ch. 26 and Fig. 49) and fix copper
tubing to the bowstring instead of the "usual! leather band (tasma) which is
there.*?* It (?) is termed maydani. If an iron striker just thick enough to ride
down the guide and as long as the width of the archer's thumb can be made, all
the better. To accommodate the bowstring, a hole of the same diameter should be
drilled right through it. It is a well-tried and useful contrivance.

907
COMMENT 1. Awkward Shots


Shooting from ground level at an enemy in a well is much the same as engaging a
target in a comparable position from the top of a fortress. That the archer
found himself more frequently in the second of the situations visualized by the
author, we need hardly doubt. The need to shoot at a target immediately beneath
the walls of a fortress could arise at any time during a siege, and fortresses
were normally designed in such a way that archers could engage anyone at the
foot of the walls from projecting towers. Where blind spots existed, however,
the method indicated in the text—an extension of the jarmaki technique
(p. 82)—could obviously be applied to great effect. To shoot a bow directly
downwards and retain one’s balance by any other normal means is almost
impossible. a

908In circumstances such as those visualized it would, one may think, be easier to
drop a rock or the like on one’s foe, but it must be remembered that while many
a warrior would have his bow with him and be in a position to take immediate
action, he might lose precious moments in finding or handling a suitable stone.


MISCELLANEOUS TECHNIQUES AND DEVICES 141

909
2. Grouping of Arrows


In the literature and legends of many countries there are stories of almost
incredible shots achieved by archers, and in modern times some remarkable shots
have indeed been made. Such feats, however, may be regarded as isolated cases
representing the perfect shot out of many thousands made. In our text, on the
other hand, we have a rare and important guide to the stan- dard of accuracy
expected of every archer. He is required to group his arrows within a circle
roughly 3 feet in diameter at 75 yards. The ability to do this with wooden
shafts and without the aid of a sighting device such as can be fitted to a bow
by the modern archer demands a very high standard of accuracy and bespeaks a
well-trained and experienced bowman. It is neverthe- Jess within the reach of
anyone who will practise with diligence.

910
3. The ‘Short URP


In the absence of any explanation of the ‘short ulk?’ it is essential first to
determine the meaning of the noun. Registered by Dozy in his Supplément (s.v.),
ulkt is defined there as ‘a kind of military exercise’. The definition could,
and should, have been a little more precise, for Reinaud—Dozy’s
authorky—although unable to determine the exact nature of what he took to be
some form of military exercise, clearly appreciated that the word was connected
with archery and leaves the impression that he thought it had to do with a
target of some kind or other (op. cit., p. 221).  That Reinaud was not far from
the truth we can now confirm from the evidence of a passage in MSS of the C
group in which we read: ‘. . . the full target (al-hadaf at-tamám) which is
called the ulli in Turkish and is known as the long field (al-maydan at-tawil)
has a length of between 130 and 140 arm-spans, though it may sometimes be less
. . ? (CA, 146a; C*, 213b; C?, 722). The ulki, then, was a target at a range of
something in the order of 284-306 yards and possibly 284- 328 yards, since the
‘long field’ with which it is said to have been synonymous is given elsewhere as
between 130 and 150 arm-spans (C', 29a; C$, 50a; C3, 21b; cf. D!, 21a; D4,
502). It is almost certainly to be identified with the Turkish ülkü (‘target,
goal’) which has been revived in the modern language in the sense of ‘an ideal,
something to aim at’ (see Moran, Turkish-English Dictionary, S.v.).

911The ‘short wiki’ must obviously have been a target at short range. How short it
actually was we cannot say for certain, but, as we shall presently see, it could
reasonably be considered to have been somewhere in the region of 75 yards.


4. Trajectory

912
The sections concerned with the height attained by an arrow on its way to the
target and the time it should take to reach it are closely related and reflect a
basically sound scientific approach to an important problem, however elementary
the recommended methods of solving it may be.

In hunting or war a low trajectory is an advantage as the archer is less likely
to miss the target through an error in his estimation of range. Should he
overestimate his range, but shoot a fast and therefore low arrow, it would be
very likely to hit the target striking high, whereas with the same degree of
error a slow arrow describing a more pronounced curve would miss by passing over
its target. Conversely, if its range is underestimated, a fast arrow may well
hit low, while a slow one will strike the ground short of the target. A second
advantage of the fast arrow over the slow is that the archer, when shooting at a
moving target, can decrease the distance by which he needs to aim ahead of the
mark. The less he has to anticipate his target, the more likely he is to hit, A
shorter time of flight offers the additional advantage of diminishing the effect
of any wind that may be present.

913With a given bow, the heavier the arrow, the slower the flight, but the harder
the striking power


142 SARACEN ARCHERY

914
by reason of its weight. A light arrow will fly faster and lower, but lack of
weight may prevent effective penctration of armour or mail.

The method of assessing velocity by shooting under a rope stretched across the
middle of the range is an important point which we have subjected to careful
scrutiny. Unfortunately the range of the target is vague since we do not know
for certain what meaning ‘short uik? had for Taybugha, but if it could be
assumed to convey the same distance as that recommended for the dexterity and
grouping tests (75 yds.), the resulting calculations are technically
interesting.

915There are a number of unknown factors, but if we start with a shaft of the
standard length, a probable path of the arrow through the air can be predicted
with reasonable accuracy (Klopsteg, Archery : The Technical Side, pp. 122-27 and
236-45). The height of the rope across the centre of the range would be about 8
feet (though we must allow for a margin on either side because the measurement
is based on human stature which is variable). Given the data suggested, it will
be found that a man, kneeling or squatting, must discharge his arrow at not less
than 180 f.p.s. if it is to hit a target on the ground at 75 yards with a
trajectory not excecding 8 feet in height. The time of flight would be about 1}
seconds. This standard represents a minimum requirement, and adherence to it
would ensure that bows of adequate power were used by archers for warfare. To us
this seems the most practical explanation of the ‘short uit’ test. The method
would certainly afford a more accurate means of assessing flight than what
amounts to a rough and ready calcula- tion of time by counting between loose and
hit.


5. Dexterity and Rate of Shooting

916
In terms intelligible to the modern reader the standard of rapidity the author
sets for the archer is the ability to discharge 3 arrows in about 1j
seconds. This is a fast time, and one’s first reaction is surprise that such a
high standard, which few, if any, Western bowmen of today could attain, should
be expected of the general run of Mameluke archers. It is nevertheless an
attainable standard as is evident from the achievement, in modern times, of
Saxton Pope who did succeed on a number of occasions in shooting 7 arrows in 8
seconds (Elmer, Target Archery, Pp. 428-30).

Accuracy naturally diminishes with increased speed, and field trials suggest
that it is difficult to exceed 8 well-aimed shots per minute, Nevertheless, it
cannot be doubted that Muslim archers could shoot at high speed and, given a
large enough target, hit with all shots. During the Second Crusade William of
Tyre, who must haye been conversant with the performance of his own bowmen,
remarked more than once on the dexterity of the enemy archers. ‘The Saracen
cavalry ... began to shoot thicker and faster than one could believe possible’
is a fairly typical comment of the period (Smail, Crusading Warfare, pp. 76-77
and nn. 8, 9).

917In contemporary military science the rate of projection of missiles, when
multiplied by their weight or explosive force, gives what is termed
‘fire-power’. If we may be excused an anachronistic and, in the context an
admittedly incongruous, use of words for a nevertheless legitimate purpose, the
fire-power of a crossbow shooting 2 x 800 gr. missiles per min. would be 1,600
gr. per min.  and might be compared with that of a hand bow shooting 8 x 400
gr., or 3,200 gr., per min.  Fire-power combined with mobility is a point upon
which modern military teaching lays great stress, and it is this combination
that undoubtedly contributed to the effectiveness of Muslim horse-archers in
their heyday.

That 3 arrows could in fact be regularly shot in about 1} seconds we do not
question; we only regret that we are not told exactly how the arrows should be
held in order to shoot with such alacrity.

9186. Razor-arrows


In a medieval battle vast number of arrows would be shot, and archers naturally
gathered all they could during a lull in readiness for further action. To deny
the enemy the use of one’s own

919
MISCELLANEOUS TECHNIQUES AND DEVICES 143


arrows while maintaining the ability to use those shot by him commends itself as
a military tactic.

920The effectiveness of the razor-arrow may be questioned since the average archer
might reasonably be expected to examine any arrow he had picked up in order to
ensure that it was sound before storing it in his quiver. Nevertheless, it is
easy to visualize the odd occasion when such a device might be effective. For
instance, an archer desperate for arrows in the heat of battle and harassed by
some marksman from whom he could not allow his eyes to stray for more than a
fleeting moment might be put out of action with a razor-arrow snatched up in
haste.


7. Nockless Arrows

921
In trials we have experienced some difficulty in retaining the nockless arrow
firmly in the tube attached to the bowstring. With practice it might be possible
to develop a surer hold. At all events, this kind of arrow commends itself as a
more effective stratagem than the razor-arrow.

In Arab Archery (p. 133) we find mention of the ring fitted to the bowstring to
take the tapered tail of an arrow, but nothing is said of either the julbah or
the razor device. On the other hand, mention is made of another contrivance
known as the birn. This was a ring loosely fitted to the string with a nail-like
projection designed for insertion into a hole previously drilled into the tail
of a nockless arrow, by which means it could then be shot.

922
8. Incendiaries


In his treatment of the pellets and the egg the author has such difficulty with
his Arabic that he fails to make himself completely clear, and the first few
lines of the text admit of more than one interpretation. In our judgement, the
idea he is trying to convey is that red- or white- hot pellets may be used
alone, but that they are more effective if used in conjunction with some
inflammable material. He then goes on to illustrate how this can best be done,
By means of the fannel-shaped device that he describes, the narrow end of which
evidently fitted over the fore- shaft of an arrow, the heated pellet and
incendiary egg could be transformed into a blazing projectile when shot. The
insertion of the pellet must, it seems to us, have preceded the insertion of the
egg, the latter fitting into the bigger end. Hence our proposed emendation of
the text. For this form of arson the archer would require the assistance of a
loader.

923We have found no reference other than that in our text to the firing of bales of
cotton at either of the sieges of Acre. Which siege is intended is not
specified, but we surmise that it is the second in 1291 in which Baybars
al-Bunduqdari deployed several hundred catapults and made extensive use of
incendiary missiles. Since the Arabic text is corrupt and can be restored in two
slightly different ways, it is difficult to decide whether the purpose of the
bales was to stop a breach or to protect part of a wall or to barricade and
reinforce. Certainly in medieval times a section of wall which showed signs of
weakening under continued bombardment by catapults would often be padded with
suitable material, such as cotton bales, which, hung from the battle- ments,
helped to deaden the effect of the missiles. As this was a normal procedure on
the part of defenders, the Crusaders may well have acted in this way at Acre
even if the fact is not mentioned by contemporary historians. It is equally
reasonable to assume that the bow, using the means described, provided a simple
and practical method of destroying this improvised protection.

In history, bows have regularly been used to project incendiaries, One method of
doing this was to shoot an inflammable liquid at the target which could be
ignited when struck by a white- hot arrowhead, Another was to launch a shaft
carrying a burning substance lit before shooting.  Once a fire had been started,
of course, its intensity could be increased by projecting more fuel into the
flames. It is obvious that in siege warfare engines capable of hurling
relatively large quantities of combustible material would be far more effective
than bows. On the other hand, to deploy catapults for action would take time,
and, where a quick attack aided by conflagration

924
144 OGQXAENAANGDIN. ANUAL X


might carry the enemy’s defences, the bow would commend itself as the more
suitable instrument.  Surprisingly, perhaps, Taybugha does not make the point,
nor does he take the matter of incendiaries any further.

925The whole problem of incendiary material has been discussed at length by
J. R. Partington in his History of Greek Fire and Gunpowder (Cambridge,
1960). In Ch. V he covers those used in Muslim lands, including those offered by
Mardi at-Tarsiisi (cf. Cahen, BEO, XII, pp. 145ff.).  The various
recommendations include a mixture suitable for projection in an egg-shell and
compounded of sandarac, ‘water of sulphur, that is, naphtha’ and colophonium
(p. 198). (“Water of sulphur would appear to have been a distilled petroleum.)

For incendiary arrows sulphur and resins mixed with some binding agent such as
pulverized straw formed a substance that could be lit and shot at a target. One
device mentioned in Arab Archery, p. 134, is a spindle-shaped arrowhead made of
a number of tubes which united at their ends to form a hollow head resembling
women's spindles. The shaft fitted into a cylindrical projection, and the head
could be filled with straw and cotton saturated with tar. A more fanciful recipe
consisted of otter fat, black sulphur, bdellium gum, pith of fresh cherry seeds,
and quick- lime, all of which were ground and kneaded with pure oil of
balsam. For further details on the incendiary arrow throughout the ages the
reader will find it useful to consult ‘The Incendiary Arrow, 480 B.C. to
A.D. 1941’, (symposium), JSAA, vol. 3, 1960, p pp. 22-24.

926Such short tests as we have been able to carry out on mixtures recommended in
medieval sii a — that, although they burn steadily when lit, it is difficult to
prevent them from blowing out en shot.


CHAPTER 26 ON SHOOTING WITH AN ARROW-GUIDE (MIJRAT)

927
There are many kinds of arrow-guide. Although originally designed for older men
who were past drawing strong bows and shooting long arrows, guides (majdr!) have
truly considerable advantages. In the first place they enable anyone using darts
(nabl) to carry with him a greater number of missiles—twice as many indeed—than
he would be capable of carrying if he were using ordinary long arrows. Another
advantage they have is that an enemy, if attacked with darts, will not see them
and dodge in the same way as he might if long arrows are used.* Yet another
advantage is that darts strike home more quickly than long arrows, for they have
a longer range (see Comment). Finally, the enemy cannot make use of darts or
shoot them back as he may well do to great effect if long arrows are used,

Among the different types of guide there arc the ‘dart’ (nab/), the ‘pen’
(galam), the ‘com- mander’s’ (asbsalàri), the ‘locust’ (jardd), and the ‘Bayram
Shah’. The safest and most con- venient from the archer's point of view is that
called the ‘king-guide’ (shah majrá). This is the one that "is slotted down the
middle and’? covers both darts and bowstring, for which reason it is called the
‘sultan of arrow-guides’.* It is used in the following manner. You first pass
the bowstring right through the guide and brace the bow, which now supports the
guide. After putting the guide to the nocking-point in the same way as you would
nock long atrows set in the centre of the bow (kabid al-qaws), you slip your
dart through the slot (shagg) right into the guide

928



929ja Yj cross section


Fic. 49. Tue Skah Majra (or Mijrat)

930
The slot at the top must be wide enough to admit the dart. The outer form could
be rounded.


145

931
146 SARAULIN AKRUOLENIL


(Fig. 49). The tassel at the end of the guide goes between the ning-finger and
middle finger, You now lock on the guide as you would if using long arrows. You
also draw and loose in the same way, except that the left arm is held firm like
a stock, Nor do you follow through with 4 forward and downward thrust of the
bow-hand as you would if shooting long arrows; you execute only half the
movement.* This is a point to watch. You should also guard against bringing the
guide to fuil draw and cocking the thumb in front of your darts. Past masters in
the art of shooting with guides can, and do, follow through with a forward and
downward thrust of the bow-hand, and they also rest the guide on the left
forearm, This is an excellent and more effective way of shooting, but the
trouble is that it can do harm to a person who does not know how to apply it
properly; for, should the guide slip, it may injure the fingers of his bow-hand
(gubbad) and put him out of action,

932Next there is the "long-nosed arrow-guide’ (myrat al-khurtiim), This is made of
a single length of wood hollowed out (niunakhar) on one side into a groove big
enough to accommodate darts, At one end of it there is a projection (&hurtüm,
‘proboscis’) of horn designed to hold the darts in place (Fig. 50). To shoot
with it, you first insert the bowstring between the horn and the wood of the
guide, take the dart, and fit its nock to the string. To nock the dart in the
guide, you close the little finger, ring-finger, and part of the middle finger,
and then grip the dart "between the thumb" and middle finger and the end of the
right index finger which is left open. The head of the dart should be near the
end of the right index finger with the long horn nose pressing on the guide. You
then nock and shoot in the manner already described.



933

Fic. 50. ‘LONG-NOSED’ GUIDE

934
Archers also use an arrow-guide called the ‘stirrup’ (ijrat ar-rikab) which has
a hand-grip of iron? and a nut like that of a jarkk (above, p. xxxii). It is
also known as the 'Maghrebi' because it was invented in the Maghreb
(i.e. N.W. Africa). Aithough an excellent device, it is difficult to master, is
liable to go wrong, and is heavy (Fig. 51). It is nevertheless possible for an
archer to develop the strength of his grasp without undue strain on his
muscles,’ so that he can use a guide of this kind with any bow hc can pull, even
though it were 100 razis (above, p. 88.) "For such a person! it has proved one
of the best and most effective field weapons, ‘and if once he can handle itl,
the archer will find it not only easier to use but also immeasurably more
effective than all other kinds of guide.* It is difficult to make, but I have
developed a modified form and made it the ‘king-guide’ (shah mxjrat), of which
name it is more worthy than the original guide of that name because it allows
more rapid shooting than its predecessor, gives greater striking power, permits
the use of a more powerful bow, and is an easier and less troublesome weapon for
the user. If an archer knows how to handle it properly, he will, by the mere
fact of using the weapon,


ON SHOOTING WITH AN ARROW-GUIDE 147

935
outstrip any archer shooting long arrows both in number of shots and in respect
of distance, I have in fact shot six darts? with the aid of this device, as
against five long arrows shot by an archer in the usual manner. My aim in
designing it was to enable the user to shoot Jarkh bolts back at the enemy aud
do twice as much damage as the jar&h, even though the jarkh might be two gintdrs
Damascus weight (about 814 Ib.). Failure to achieve this purpose is indicative
of bad shooting, incompetence, and witlessness,

To use the guide, the archer first grasps the handle with the index finger,
middle finger and ring-finger, and, if the handle is big enough to take it, the
little finger as well. He next presses the trigger (miftak, ‘key’) with his
thumb, and with the head of the bolts opens the nut (yawezah) that is fitted in
the guide for catching the string so as to allow the latter to enter its holder
(bayt).  He then sets the guide in the nocking position so that he can see the
string correctly housed ( fi bayttht), locked, and held by the nut. Then, taking
his thumb off the trigger, he proceeds to draw, baving first nocked the bolt in
the manner previously described. Once at full draw, he presses the trigger
strongly with the thumb and looses, but in so doing does not follow through with
any forward and downward movement of the bow-hand. Before letting go of the
guide he sets it once more to the nocking-point of his bowstring, takes another
bolt, and nocks it, He may shoot in this way as much as he wishes, but the
resetting of the string in the nut should follow quickly

936



937Fic, 5x. A STIRRUP-GUIDE Details of mechanism are not known.


upon discharge, When he has finished shooting, the archer presses the trigger
with his thumb and returns the nut to the same position as before
shooting. Great care should be taken not to forget, otherwise the guide will be
put out of action and rendered unserviceable. Once this happens it will only
work again after being unscrewed and repaired—a difficult task for anyone not
familiar with the procedure,

938H you have mastered the art of following through with a forward and downward
movement of the bow hand, you may use the technique, but do be on your guard,
when shooting with guides, against raising the end of your thumb after
completing the draw. The same rule applies when shooting with long arrows,
Finally, don’t twist the guide when drawing. It should be as straight as a die
at the source of traction right from the moment you start to puli until the very
moment you loose.??


COMMENT

939
I. General


Basically, the arrow-guide is a simple piece of equipment designed to cnable the
archer to draw an arrow inside the bow and therefore shoot arrows or darts that
would otherwise be too short

940
148 SARACEN ARCHERY


for his draw. Faris and Elmer, who were the first in modern times to discuss the
nature of this interesting device, rightly consider it to be ‘one of the most
important discoveries in modern toxophilitic research’ (Arab Archery, p. 174).

941There is more than one explanation of its origin. The author of Arab
Archery—aftet at- Tabari—favours the view that it was invented by ‘the Moslems’
when driven, while fighting ‘the Turks’, to devise some method of suppressing
the enemy’s devastating practice of returni spent arrows (p. 124). Others
ascribe its invention to the Persians who, after adopting the technique of
shooting from the oblique and more effective position in order to overcome the
strength of Turkish shields, were obliged to use longer arrows and therefore
‘for the use of old men and youngsters . . . unable to effect the long and hard
draws resulting from the very long arrows, evolved shooting with the Ausbän and
dawdan arrows; thereby bringing up the driving force of their shots to a par
with the shots of the Strong men who could draw a long arrow to the



942

FIG. 52. THE ARROW-GUIDE (Majrá, or Mijrat) (a). The dart in position on the
string is shown without fetchings for clarity.  Crushing of the feathers would
be of little consequence as they would spring back when the dart was shot.

943



944(b}, The arrow-guide at full draw.


ON SHOOTING WITH AN ARROW-GUIDE 149

945
full limit’ (ibid., pp. 124-25). These and other views which need not be
considered here recur in technical literature.

Darts for use with arrow-guides varied in length according to type (above,
p. 29), and for some we can offer approximate lengths, These are (a) husbán:
about 15 in.; (b) dawdan (?, or dudani): about r0 in. ; (c) jarad: from 74
in. to 24 in. ; (d) 'usfüri: as in the preceding (though not according to Arab
Archery, p. 129, in which it does not exceed 3 in}. At first sight one is apt to
suppose that even the longest dart must have been much lighter than the normal
arrow by reason of its shorter shaft. Taybugha offers no details on this aspect
of the problem, but in Arab Archery we read: ‘The kind of wood suitable for
these arrows is heavy, hard, and strong. Likewise, the arrowheads should be
heavy as light ones are worthless... Such arrows should weigh ten dirhams each
[about 480 gr.]... The 'usfüri, on the other hand, should weigh three dirhams
[about 145 gr.], perhaps even less, and be of very thick wood" (pp. 129-30). If
we compare these weights with those of normal arrows shown on p. 30, the war
dart may only have weighed 100 gr. less than a long arrow used with the same
bow. The difference in weight, therefore, was probably not as great as one might
at first suppose. That it nevertheless existed, on the other hand, is inferable
from the statement that ‘darts strike home more quickly than long arrows, for
they have a longer range’ (p. 145). An increase in speed and range suggests (a)
a higher initial velocity consistent with the performance of the lighter missile
if shot from the same bow as one that is heavier, and (b) a slight reduction im
surface drag resulting from the shorter shaft of the dart.

946It is difficult to say precisely how much truth there is in the assertion that
darts would not be seen and avoided in the same way as ordinary
arrows. Admittedly, a smaller missile would be a little less conspicuous, and
its higher velocity would allow less time for evasion or deflexion with a
shield. The most important advantage, however, would undoubtedly lie in the
archer’s ability to carry twice as many darts as ordinary arrows. In long-range
combat he would obviously be out of action as soon as he had expended the
contents of his quiver, and it might take him a little time to replenish it from
the supply-train or gather spent arrows shot by the enemy. The more he could
conveniently carry with him, therefore, the better.

The archer using a simple guide could quickly change to normal arrows whenever
he wished.  In this connexion it is worth noting that in existing Chinese
quivers, for instance, there are often as many as four compartments to
accommodate different types of arrow. Although we ourselves have found no
mention of any similar practice among archers of the Middle East, we do not
discount the possibility of its existence.

947
2. Some Forms of Arrow-guide


We know of no surviving example of a Middle Eastern guide. The Koreans, however,
used the same device, and a good Korean specimen is included in the Ingo Simon
Collection, Manchester Museum, No. O.7728 (Pl. 17). Made from a length of bamboo
about } in. in diameter, it is 281 in. long. Viewed in cross-section, it is
slightly more than semicircular, and at the rear end there are, as can be seen
in the plate, two holes through which a cord or thong was threaded for retaining
in the archer's drawing hand. This article represents the guide in its most
simple form.  How it was arranged and held can be seen in Fig. 52. Locking in
the usual way on both guide and dart, the archer drew both items together. When
the string was loosed, the dart was driven down the guide which remained in the
drawn position, held by the cord in the fingers of the right hand.

948According to Arab Archery, there were four kinds of guide: square, round,
hexagonal, and octagonal (p. 126). How these compared, or whether they
corresponded, with the first five listed by Taybugha, it is impossible to
say. That known as the ‘pen’ may have been so called because of its appearance,
for we learn from Arab Archery that ‘the end of the guide which is


£50 CARALEN ARUNEK Y

949
toward the bowstring at the time of shooting should be slightly thinner than the
other end and should also be pointed like a pen’ (ibid.). The Shape of the rear
end of the Korean guide could be roughly described in the same terms, Some clue
to the nature of the jarád, or ‘locust’, may, we suspect, be contained in
Mardi’s description of the husban, or ‘hailstone’ (Cahen, BEO, XII,
Pp. 132-33). The latter was a tubular device accommodating a horn runner with
stud-like projec- tions riding in a slot on one side (Fig. 53). Its missiles
whose description agrees with that given elsewhere of ‘locusts’ (like
‘hailstones’, a descriptive term from which the guide in each case takes its
name) were the length of the little finger. A number of them could be loaded,
one after the other, through a hole near the rear end of the guide, which thus
amounted to a breech- loading dart projector, When loosed, the runner ejected
the darts, which, once discharged, we are told, scattered ‘like locusts’,
Although small, light missiles of this kind can have had little pene- trative
power, we can imagine their nuisance value as a means of harassing unprotected
horses or men.


3. The ‘King-guide’

950The original form of the ‘king-guide’ as described in our text is reasonably
clear (Fig. 49).  It was a tubular piece of equipment slotted on opposite
sides. The slot in what would be the upper surface when the guide was in use had
to be wide enough to admit a dart. That in the lower surface, on the other hand,
needed only to be of sufficient width to permit the bowstring free passage.

Two objections can be seen to this sort of contrivance. Firstly, the string must
surely have rubbed against the side of the slot through which it ran, with
consequent reduction of efficiency arising from friction, Secondly, the fact
that the String was threaded through the guide means that, to shoot long arrows,
the bow would need to be unstrung to permit removal of the guide.

951The modified ‘king-guide’ evidently combined the idea of the original with that
of the ‘stirrup’ variety (Fig. 51), It appears to have been a slotted tube of
the kind indicated above.  Built into the stock of the guide at the rear end was
a nut of the same form as that used in cross- bows, but no doubt smaller. A
trigger mechanism was incorporated, but we are forced to conclude that its
design was faulty because of the trouble that could result if the archer failed
to reset the nut after use. We offer no suggestions about the possible ways in
which the mechanism might have operated since they would of necessity be so
conjectural as to be of no real value.

The stirrup which was incorporated in the modified ‘king-guide’ would have
permitted a more

952



953

Horn traveller

954
section


Fig. 53. THE SLOTTED GUIDE

955
UN SHUULING WITH AN ARROW-GUIDE ISI


powerful draw than any that could be achieved with the thumb, but the claim that
it could do twice as much damage as the farkh must be taken with a grain of
salt. That it was effective for shooting jarkk bolts if handled by persons not
guilty of ‘bad shooting, incompetence, and witlessness’ is probably nearer the
truth.

956
4. An Experimental Guide


In the course of many experiments conducted both by ourselves and others the
most effective guide of which we have had experience is one constructed by
E. G. Heath whose interest and assistance we gratefully acknowledge. Made from
well-seasoned beech, it is 31 in. long and rectangular in cross-section. The
internal width of the channel is $ in. and its depth a little less than }
in. Practical experience has proved the measurements adequate. The rear end
tapers ‘like a pen’, and a cord is fitted 14 in. from the tip. In accordance
with one of the methods advocated in Arab Archery (p. 126) the cord is tied to a
ring which fits on the ring finger during shooting.

957In using the guide we also followed advice contained in Arab Archery regarding
the fletching of the 15-in. darts, viz. ‘There should be two side feathers just
outside the groove of the guide at the pen-shaped end, and a “male-feather”
(dhakar) in the hollow’ (p. 130). Although, in locking, the male-feather is
crushed as a result of pressure against the shaft from the middle phalanx of the
index finger of the drawing hand, there are no adverse effects since the vane
springs back undamaged as soon as the dart is discharged.


CHAPTER 27

958
ON THE PROCEDURES, CONDUCT, AND PRINCIPLES TO BE OBSERVED BY A NOVICE!


i “Mark and carefully retain the fundamentals as expounded in our work, for
practice will prove then to be sound. If you are wise, you will practise
patiently and persistently, for anything hard can become easy with
practice. Furthermore, before you uy for marksmanship and take up wagering,
aspire to mastery of the draw and accuracy in range and elevation.’!? This
advice is intended to encourage the novice (alib), firstly, to apply himself to
learning, secondly, to acquire a thorough grasp of the fundamentals of archery
and the technique of perfect shooting by dint of hard and regular practice, and
thirdly, to aspire to mastery of the draw until it is so impressed upon his
limbs that he will infringe none of the fundamental rules when shooting. All
this can only be attained by patience, perseverance, and much regular practice,
which must be acquired before he tries for marksmanship and wagering; for if the
novice is bent on shooting a marks- rd: arrow he will fail to notice that he is
unconsciously infringing the fundamental rules of

9595 art.

The first thing that a learner should do is to take a light bow of the kind
termed kabbad,?  grasp it, and draw with the three appropriate fingers for some
days until he can apply the correct grasp. He should next lock his fingers on
the bowstring without using an arrow and draw for a time until he is able to
lock correctly and can thus grasp, lock, and draw to the best of his physical
ability. When he has succeeded in this, he should, for some days, nock an arrow
and bring it to full draw without shooting. He should then lock on the string
without an arrow and loose an uncharged string, practising this for a time until
he can release correctly. In his next stage he should nock what is known as a
Jarrám, “or unfletched arrow,!* and draw and release it at a practice drum
(battiyyah; below, p. 156). He should do this for quite a time, and, once able
to shoot correctly, progress to a bow a little!5 more powerful than the one he
has been shooting and again shoot at the practice drum for some days. Every few
days he should take a more powerful bow until he has worked through five
successive bows, each stronger than the one before, and the fifth most powerful
of all. ;

960Once he has acquired control and developed a natural proficiency in shooting, he
should begin to bend powerful bows that are as strong as he can possibly handle
and continue shooting at the practice drum night and day with different
bows. When he can shoot correctly and his limbs are steady and firm, ‘he can
then go out into the field!" and shoot at the butt for some days without using
any mark, all the tíme watching where his arrows fall. Once he can do correctly
all that he has set out to do, he should next go out into the desert and shoot
into the great void, again without any mark, al! the time watching the flight of
his arrows through the air. When he can see that his arrows do not flirt, but
pass properly through the air in even flight, he should, after mastering all
this, shoot at a mark on his own and persevere until he attains a high
proportion of accurate shots,


152

961
FPFRULEVURES, LUINDULCGLI, AND PKINUIVLES 153


During all this training he should go and consult master archers and show them
how he shoots, asking them to point out his faults and how to eliminate them.®
He should regularly watch how first-class bowmen shoot without taking part
himself and endeavour to assimilate good. points either from what he himself can
see to be good performance or from their own conversation.  These he should put
into practice on his own, and when he has acquired mastery and considers his
shooting to be as perfect as that of other archers, and when this view is
confirmed by what full-fledged archers "who have seen his shooting’ have to say
about him, he may join them. In his conversation!" with such persons he should
be polite and gracious, adopting an attitude of self-abasement and humility, and
should shoot with them as they deem appropriate until he becomes conversant with
their customs and drill. During this time, furthermore, he should seek useful
advice from persons he considers qualified to give it. When he outclasses
someone else, he should not exalt himself above that person nor despise him nor
provoke him, but rather make modesty his rule and observe silence and good
manners, Finally, hard and regular practice is as a religious bounden duty to be
performed by every archer whether he be a teacher (mu allim) or learner
(mutaallim), 1?

962
i


It is established in authentic tradition?? that the Prophet said, ‘The angels
attend no human sport save archery.’ ‘Archers should therefore be aware of the
exalted station of the angels who attend them and should rank them as guests and
respect them, for the Prophet said, ‘If a man believe in God and the Last Day,
let him do honour to his guest.’ Going to the shooting range (marma), then,
should be regarded by the archer as going to the mosque, and he should consider
those with whom he consorts there as leaders of men and persons of the highest
standing, Likewise, he should think of his training in archery as training in
religious knowledge. He should therefore make a practice of first performing a
lesser ablution!* and set about his business, praising God with tongue and heart
as he makes for one of the gardens of Paradise with the peace of God upon him
and with dignity of bearing. When he reaches his destination (i.e. the range},
he should enter politely, greeting all those present with the words, ‘Peace be
upon you!’  He would do well also to perform two rak‘ahs in an act of
worship. It is not a matter of saluting the actual place, but rather a key to
safe-keeping, success, and accurate shooting; for if pro- ceedings are opened
with an act of worship, they will be worthy of a happy issue and will be blessed
with God’s good direction and success, The archer should next say a private
prayer and ask God—exalted be He—for good direction and right guidance, for it
is an established tradition that the Prophet said, ‘‘Ali,!® ask God for guidance
and good direction, and, in asking for guidance, remember to ask that you be
guided in the right path, and, in asking for good direction, remember to ask
that the arrow be well directed to the mark.’

963The next step is for the archer to take out his bow and arrows, examine them,
and see what choice shooting demands. Tightening his belt, he then prepares
himself for shooting, and, when his turn comes round, rises, tucks up his sleeve
if it is too ample,!’ and gathers his skirt into his belt if it is hanging down!
and utters the invocation, ‘In the name of God? He then takes his arrows in his
right hand and his bow in his left and stations himself in his proper place in a
polite, calm, and dignified manner, at the same time lowering his eyes in modest
silence, moving gracefully and easily, and praying God to grant him power,
might, and accuracy. He next places his arrows in his waist-belt, takes out the
first arrow, examines it, spins it on the nail of the middle finger in between
the ends of the left index finger and thumb (above, p. 30), nocks it gracefully
without looking at the operation, and then shoots in the manner already de-
scribed, When the arrow leaves the centre of the bow; he should follow it with
his eyes to the point of descent and, if it hits the mark, praise God and show
Him gratitude. If he misses, he should reflect on the reason for his failure and
earnestly try to eradicate the fault which caused him to miss.

7

964
sii


Every time the archer shoots he should invoke God—exalted be He--with the words,
‘In the name of God’ and, whenever he makes a hit, he should praise Him to whom
belongs all power and glory. He should regard accurate shooting as proceeding
from the bounty of God—exalted be He—and the divine guidance and assistance. If
he misses, he should not become exasperated or despair of God’s refreshing
justice, nor should he revile himself or his bow or his arrows. To do

965
with cries of ‘Well done!’ ‘And by God,’ said he, ‘they had no sooner applauded
than I blushed for shame at such-and-such a mistake I had once made in the same
matter!’

Do beware of impairing your own ability by seeing another hit the mark when you
yourself have failed to make the same grade, for there is no question bere of
any deficiency. No, deficiency, all deficiency in fact, is a matter of bei
incapable of aspiring to reach the highest level and attain your objective. Do
not tell yourself, therefore, that you cannot attain what others have achieved,
for anyone who says this betrays the fact that he is a failure who cannot
succeed and has lost all ambition. It is upon aspirations that men depend for
achievement. In the two collec- tions of authentic traditions of the Prophet! it
is reported that he said, ‘The believer who is strong is better in the sight of
God and dearer to Him than the believer who is weak.’ In every righteous
enterprise, therefore, strive after that which will avail you, ask God for
succour, and do not flag. On this very Point one poet says:

966
‘If the qualities of a man arouse your admiration, then be him, And you yourself
will soon display those same qualities that you admire in him.  To generous and
noble deeds there is none to bar your way, if only you approach them."


Another poet says:

967
‘It (sc. defeat) surely must not cause you to despair Of preparing for another
fight, for glory comes by Stages and degrees; The spear’s cane shaft whose
height you have beheld grows slowly, climbing joint by joint.’


iv

968
that the Prophet said, ‘Do not abuse your brother, for God will deliver him and
visit you yourself with affliction.’ The archer, and indeed any other Muslim and
believer, must concern himseif only with his own faults, Praise God, then, and
do not grudge your brother archer his successful shooting nor make his
achievement seem paltry in his eyes. You should not say, ‘A good shot for one
who is no archer!’ nor again, “A lucky shot!” This kind of behaviour is that of
low and ignorant people who know nothing of life and have no practical
experience of men and affairs.


+

969
PROCEDURES, CONDUCT, AND PRINCIPLES 155


know how to heat a bow (above, p. 99) and how to adjust and repair it, how to
straighten his arrows and correct the curve of his bow, and how to knot his bows
trings. He should also know how to eradicate a fault if one occurs fand know the
reason for the fault. When??? he has a knowledge, mastery, and understanding of
such matters as well as skill and proficiency in shooting, and then, acquiring
familiarity with the rules of wagering and legitimate shooting, is able to
distinguish between what is permissible and what is not, is familiar with
competition shooting and the rules and regulations for other archery
contests-—when, I say, he has a knowledge, mastery, and understanding of such
matters, a man is then a full-fledged archer and can take his place as such
among his fellows and share their fortunes and misfortunes. But even so, he will
still not have a complete grasp of all there is to know about shooting, and he
will never be too old to learn.  Authorities on archery say that, no matter how
much knowledge of the art of shooting a man may acquire and no matter how long
he lives, he will not achieve complete mastery,

970
COMMENT 1. The Training of an Archer


An important part of Mustafa Kani’s manual is devoted to a description of the
guild of Turkish archers, the conduct of its business, the acceptance of
novices, rules of practice, and ethics (Hein, /s?., XV, pp. 241
ff. Cf. Klopsteg, pp. 106 ff.). It is regrettable that nothing wholly comparable
is contained in our treatise, for the rules of practice and ethical standards
expounded in the above chapter and the one that is to follow are discernibly
associated with some system of professional organization similar in kind to that
described by G. Baer in his analysis of guild structure in seventeenth-century
Egypt (Egyptian Guilds, pp. 49 fÈ). There we encounter a hierarchy of masters,
master-apprentices, and ordinary apprentices, all subject to the authority of a
leading member, or shaykh, and enjoying the spiritual patronage of some
venerated per- sonage often belonging to the generation of the Prophet.

971Within this hierarchical system the first step of the apprentice (talib,
muta'allim, mubtadi) was to attach himself to his occupational group by
establishing a personal relationship with a master (usta, or ustádh, mu'allim,
munta(h)i) whose business it would be to instruct him in the secrets of the
craft and the traditions, rituals, and religious ceremonies peculiar to his
group.  After an initial period of probation the novice entered into a covenant
Cahd) with his master who bound him by oath to the observance of certain duties
(cf. that described below, p. 157). His ordinary apprenticeship served, he
qualified in due course for guild membership as master- apprentice, or
journeyman, The next and, for most ordinary members the final, step was the
attainment of a licence (jdzah) to practise as a master. On each of the four
occasions mentioned formal proceedings with prayers and a greater or lesser
degree of ritual were held in the presence of officers or members of the guild
(ikheodn, ‘brethren’.

To judge from all that is inferable from the sources available to us, the career
of a Mameluke archer, mutatis mutandis, followed a similar kind of course within
the same kind of institutional framework, though there are indications that it
was not as rigid or elaborate as some may care to think.

972
2. Rules of Practice


Most contemporary Western instructors would approve the principles of training
advocated in the text. At the heart of the matter is the concept that the
beginner should learn to use a bow without actually discharging an arrow so
that, undistracted by the behaviour of the missile, he may concentrate on
handling the weapon in the approved manner. Only after the attainment of
reasonable proficiency in this respect should he be allowed to shoot arrows,

973When the shooting stage is reached, there is much merit in discouraging the use
of a target until


150 AFLINN ULAN OWA

974
the pupil has learned to group his arrows to the best of his ability. Good
grouping will indicate that he has achieved a consistent technique—the essence
of good shooting—and is ready to attempt the relatively simple step of placing a
group around the centre of a target.

The baztiyyah, or practice drum, according to Reinaud, was a kind of barrel
covered at one end with a cow hide so as to give a target face and mounted at
breast-height on a four-legged stand (FA, 1848, pp. 218-19). A stuffed bag or
sack (torba) similarly mounted and angled at about 44° is mentioned by Mustafa
Kani as a taining device for flight shooting (Hein, Isl., XV, PP. 255-56,
figs. 37 and 38. Cf. Klopsteg, pp. 112-13 and fig 42). The diameter of the drum
is not given, but we conjecture that it was on the small side with a diameter of
2 feet or so.

975
3. Ethics and Courtesy


-Quite apart from drill, discipline, and orderliness, the commendable theme of
politeness and good manners seems to have attached itself to archery from the
earliest times. The motto of the Grand National Archery Society, viz. “Union,
True Heart, and Courtesie’, echoes the spirit of a Chinese poem dating from the
second or third century B.C.:

976
Clout and pin-hole are marked, already is hung The shooting-target, where with
bow in hand, And arrows under arm Each archer does obeisance to each, Willing to
yield his rights of precedence.  (‘The Great Summons’, Waley, Chinese Poems,
p. 42.)


The standards of conduct laid down in our text are ageless and, religious
aspects apatt, are as closely followed today as they must have been a thousand
years ago.

977
4. The Ghunyah and a Passage in Al-Jabarti’s ' Aja'ib


Between the code of ethics and behaviour communicated by our author and that
laid down in an jázah, or licence, granted to a Cairene bowyer of the eighteenth
century there is a striking similarity which will not elude those intimately
acquainted with al-Jabarti’s chronicle, ‘Aja’ib al-athdr, in which the second is
recorded (Cairo edo., A.H. 1322, II, pp. 227-30. Cf. Baer, op. cit.,
PP. 52-53). In tone and phraseology the text of the Egyptian raza is, as a
whole, so reminiscent of Taybughi's treatise that there can be little doubt that
the latter is the source of its inspiration.  By comparison with examples of
ijázahs known to us from our manuscript sources, that quoted by al-Jabarti is an
elaborate affair and cannot be regarded as typical of the period which directly
concerns us. It does, however, testify to the currency and authority of
Taybugha’s work.

978
CHAPTER 28 ON THE DUTIES AND QUALITIES OF A MASTER AND TEACHER


A teacher’s first duty is to exercise power of discernment. By this we mean that
he will need, firstly, to determine a person’s physical capacity in the light of
the fact that there are different somatic types and that some people have longer
or shorter limbs than others, and, secondly, to detect a pupil’s natural
intelligence or obtuseness and his ability, or lack of it, to assimilate what he
is taught.

979His next step will be to subject the novice to a religious test if he is an
adult; for if he is a boy the permission of his parents? will be required. Once
he is satisfied that he is a Muslim, he should extract from him an undertaking
that he will shoot no other Muslim, nor any non-Muslim enjoying treaty rights,
nor any dog, nor any four-footed animal, except in hunting or unless it be
something which must of necessity be destroyed, nor anything that will involve
him in an act of injustice.  Once he is sure that his pupil will accept all
these conditions and is satisfied with his religious qualifications, he should
take him and endeavour to instruct him according to the requirements of his
physique as indicated above and should counsel him once he is sure that he is
worthy of instruction. For it has been transmitted from an authoritative source
thar to withhold learning from one who is worthy of it is not lawful. Such a one
must be granted a share thereof as of right, especially if he appreciates the
value of learning, longs for it, and seeks God's good pleasure and not vainglory
and vanity. In this connexion experts on archery quote religious scholars as
their authority for the maxim: ‘Neither withhold advantage from those who are
worthy of it, and thereby do them wrong, nor grant it to those who are unworthy
and, thus squandering it, do advantage wrong.’

As to a master’s duties, he should train his pupils, bring them together in
unity and concord, spur them on to work, reprimand them only in private, and
labour to the end that they may strive to learn and ever? reverence the place
dedicated to archery, wherein none should be allowed to utter any profanity,
inasmuch as it is a place of worship, and places of worship belong to God.

980Proceedings should be opened with the formula ‘In the name of God’. Upon
loosing, the for- mula ‘God is greatest’ should be pronounced, and, after that,
God's blessing upon the Messenger of God, his family, and his Companions? should
be invoked. Where it is mcrited, the master should compliment a shooter to
encourage him. He should teach his pupils all that is good and at the same time
restrain them from all that is bad.

A master should be taciturn and of dignified bearing and commanding presence,
yet not haughty. He should be stable and patient and not too hasty with his
answers, All kinds of learning may be observed in all mankind, and there is no
one who does not have some share in God's bounty. It is desirable that a master
should have the strength of an elephant, the spring of a lion, the boldness of a
leopard, and the cunning of a fox; that he should have for his colleagues the
affection that a dog has for its master;* that he should exercise the patience
of a cat. He should make the sword his companion, the lance his friend, the
shicld his fortress, the dagger his secret weapon. He should display great
tolerance and be indulgent. The beginning of all things is piety,

981
157


I58 Fee Ces. erere Bree le OF re ort a which is a man’s capital stock.> These,
then, are some of the qualities which a teaching master

982
should possess.  As regards the qualities required of a novice, some of these
have already been mentioned, The


foundations upon which they all rest are humility, hearing attentively and
obeying that which is

983
pleasing to God Almighty and His Messenger — may God bless him, his house and
his Companions, and grant them peace !


CIAL

984
APPENDIX 1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES


In the course of Islamic history the values of units of measurement used in the
Near and Middle East have varied according to time and place. Some impression of
the difficulties created in consequence may be formed from a perusal of the
Appendix to Arab Archery, in which it can be seen that measurements furnished by
the Arabic original left Faris and Elmer groping for equivalents (sects, 2, 6,
7, 11, 12, 13, respectively pp. 159-60, 165-66, 166, 172-74). The genera]
mensural problem is aggravated by the fact that an author writing in one part of
the Muslim world will, without acknowledgement, commonly quote, say, from
earlier works originating in other parts and, in so doing, transmit
specificatious expressed in terms identical in form with, but in value different
from, those used in his own area and period. In determining the equivalents of
units mentioned in the present work we have had the benefit of the unstinted
advice of a noted authority in the field, Professor Walther Hinz of the
University of Göttingen, author of Islamische Masse und Gewichte (Leiden, 1955)
and contributor of the article on the cubit in the new edition of the
Encyclopaedia of Islam (s.v. Dhira‘). We gratefully acknowledge his assistance.

985Fortunately for us, Taybughà does define his cubit as ‘the carpenter's cubit,
that is to say, the Hashimi cubit’ (p. 8). This statement in itself poses a
problem since we know of no carpenter’s cubit that is the same as the
Hashimite. However that may be, we have taken the latter as the basis of
conversion with a value of 66-5 cm., or 26-18 in., though it must be noted that
it varied between limits of 66-81 cm. and 66:27 cm. As for the girát, there were
24 to the cubit.

The ragi of Damascus was constant at 600 dirhams, of which the exact equivalent
is 1°85 kg., or 4:07 Ib. avoirdupois. The weight of the Damascus dirham was
therefore 3:086 grams, or 47-6 grains.

986Having established these equivalents for weights given in the early part of the
Ghunyah, we subsequently found mention of a bow of roo razis (Ch. 16, p. 86), or
407 lb. Since a bow of this weight is well beyond the limit of human strength it
became evident to us that the expression ‘r00 ratis! was either a figure of
speech or quoted from some other source (see p. 88). If the second of these
alternatives is the explanation, the bow of 100 rats is in all probability that
which is frequently linked in Arabic archery literature with the name of Tahir
ai-Balkhi, and the unit is almost certainly Iraqi. To the Iraqi rag? there were
either 128-4 dirhams or 130 dirhams, and, since the dirham equivalent is 3-125
grams, or 48-2 grains, the second figure—130, to which we incline—gives a ra?
cquivalent of 406-25 grains, or 14°3 oz.

All other problems apart, we must not lose sight of the hazard—encountered in
some MSS— of copyists’ interpolations which introduce standards other than those
intended. Thus, for instance, it does not follow that, because a text reads ‘x
raris Damascus weight’, the author wrote the words “Damascus weight’. The
copyist, once conditioned to this qualification, may have continucd to add it
where the author deliberately omitted it. We have personally encountered this
kind of interpolation and warn against uncritical acceptance of specifications
occurring in Arabic sources.

987
159


100 AGF FLNIS i

988
The following table summarizes the values offered by us for weights and measures
in the Middle East during the fourteenth century:


Damascus, or Syrjan, measure

989
Cubit 665 cm. 2618in.  . l Qirát 2:77 cm. 1:09 in. (for practical purposes I-I
in.)  Rat 1850'0 grams 407 lb.  Dirham 3:086 grams 476 grains Baghdad, or Iraqi,
measure Cubit 49:875 cm. 19:63 in.  Rail 406:25 prams I43 02.  Dirham 3:125
grams 482 grains Cairo, or Egyptian, measure Cubit 5404 cm. 21-28 in.  Rati 4375
grams 154 or.  Dirham 3:125 grams 48-2 grains NOTE: 100 ratis — — 1 qinjár


I2 üigtyyalts = 1 rau

990
The fist, the finger, and the arm-span were canonically standardized at 8-312
cm. (3:272 in.), 2-078 cm. (0'818 in.), and 1995 cm., or almost 2 metres (2:188
yds.). We find these equivalents quite acceptable, but are by no means convinced
that archers adhered exactly to such measures.  Certain indications in technical
literature suggest that rule of thumb was not unusual. Further- more, we do not
know for sure that the canonical arm-span (4 Iraqi cubits) was that of the
Mameluke archers in Syria. As regards the span, many dictionaries give an
equivalent of 9 in., but it may be concluded from p. 29 thar if the length of an
arrow is 30 in., the span would be 7$ in. As Elmer, a physician, points out, the
average man cannot—he presumably means without undue strain and stretch—span
much more than 8 in., whatever may be said to the contrary (Arab Archery,
p. 159).

One final word: where conversions are given in the text, we avoid unrealistic
numbers of decimal points and offer the nearest practical equivalents.

991
APPENDIX 2 THE BOW: TERMINOLOGY


In CD the various parts of a composite bow are named (C!, 21b-22b; C?, 39b-40b;
C?, 154-162; D’, 16a-17a; D?, 46a-b). Many terms date from a very much earlier
period than that to which the Ghunyah belongs, and we cannot be certain that all
were in use in the fourteenth century. The following translation is based on C*
with emendations from other MSS where the text is corrupt:

992
“A bow has five members (awal): two limbs, two siyahs, and a grip. It has four
joints (mafasil): two at the junctures between the szyahs and the limbs and two
at the juncture between the limbs and the grip. It has an upper section which is
the one nearer the sky (i.e. when the bow is held correctly in a vertical
position). Extending from the tip of the upper siyah to a point one finger’s
width within the grip, it is called the shooting limb (bayt ar-ramy) because the
centre which it marks (sc. at the point where it ends on the bow) is the point
which the arrow passes when shot. The remaining limb is termed the dropping-limb
(bayr al-isgat) or the descending-limb (bayt al-hatt) because it drops earthward
when shot.

As regards the names of the various parts of the bow, the place into which the
loop (‘urwah) of the bowstring fits is called the nock (farg). It is also termed
by the Arabs &uzr (‘notch’) and by some Air ("lap, bosom’). The curved
extremities are called siyahs. The siyah is also called by the Arabs gufr
(‘finger-nail’) or 'usfür (sparrow, peg’), or fawg (‘tip, point’), or
galansuzwah (‘tall cap’).® The eminence on which the knot of the bowstring rests
when the bow is strung is termed 'agabah (‘acclivity’).4 The Arabs also call it
utrak (‘cuticle’). The section from the base of the siyah to the grip is called
bayt (‘house’, i.e. the limb).* The Persians call it dustár. The juncture
between the siyah and the limb is called rukbah (‘knee’). The daffatà I-fug! are
the ends of the limbs at the base of the grip. The point which the arrow passes
when shot is termed kabid al-gaws ("liver, centre, of the bow’), or dimak, or
niyar (‘heart’), The ibranjak is.a piece of wood in the inner surface (taf) of
the grip at the point where the horn strips meet. The bone which covers the
handle is called Audiid.* When a bow reverts to its reflexed position by turning
backwards, it is said to be mu‘ajjirak, that is to say, ‘reverted’ (rajr
ak). This term is used if the bow is relaxed (mahtatah, i.e. unbraced). When it
goes back upon its belly (i.c. to the braced position) this action is called
inking’ (‘bending over’).

993
a. The centre of the bow is taken to mark the end of the upper limb, which, it
will be recalled, is longer than the lower. The explanation of the ‘shooting
limb’ in Arab Archery, p. 14, is that the upper limb is so called “because it
accounts for most of the shooting’. It is less satisfactory than the one we have
here.

b. D: “it is called bayt katt al-watr’, i.e. the limb from which the string is
removed, presumably when onc unbraces. C's explanation 1s based, it scems, on a
misunderstanding of the meanings of hart and /sgát in this context.

994C. In Arab Archery, p. 15, the zifr (gufr), or ‘usfur), is given as the part
between the nock and the


II

995
162 APPENDIX 2



996


7 Nail(Zufr) S Nock (Fard)

997



998

Sinew (Aqab) Bowstring loop Urwah) Knee (Rukbah) yi i Neck ('Unq) Working part
of / | the limb e Back (Zahr) — — — Bowstring(Watr)

999
Arrow Pass


(Dimak) SB Grip} PA (Qabda ) f 7 RA

1000
mate lo A c m T


Fic. 54. THe Bow: TERMINOLOGY The upper, or ‘shooting’, limb {bayt ar-ramy) of a
composite bow from India, Cf. Taybugha’s terms in Fig 5-

1001
APPENDIX 2 163


extremity of the siyah. In the Mukhassas, VI, 43, it is given as the part
extending from beyond the place where the string is knotted to the end of the
bow, These definitions are more appropriate than those given here.

1002. In Arab Archery, p. 15, this term is taken to mean ‘string-stopper’, but there
is nothing in the Arabic to justify such a translation. The word could mean a
‘sinew-binding’, however.

. Hence bayt can mean either the entire limb, including the siyah, or only the
working part of the limb,

1003. This expression normally means ‘cusps of the nock’ of an arrow. Perhaps we
should read farg ‘division’ for fag, translating as ‘the sides of the division’,
i.e. of the splice. The term daffah also occurs in Arab Archery, p. 15, where it
is said that ‘The end of each arm adjacent to the grip, where flexibility
begins, is called a daffah’.

. The reading hudüd is uncertain. The same sentence occurs in Arab Archery,
p. 15, where it has been read as khudrud. No bone covering has been found in the
handle of any extant Oriental composite, but such a feature does occur in Avar
and Magyar types up to the tenth

1004
century A.D.  . The English-speaking archer would term this ‘following the
string’.


APPENDIX 3 ARROWS: TERMINOLOGY

1005
In CD various kinds and different parts of arrows are named as indicated below
(see C!, 342-b; C3, 57a-b; C?, 26b—27a; D', r9b-20a; D*, 49a, 53b). It should
not be assumed without further investigation that all the terms are known to
Taybughá or that they were used by contemporary archers since it seems likely
that most of them were introduced into CD from much earlier sources. Similar
data are offered in Arab Archery, Ch. xxxvii, pp. 103 ff., but the reader should
note: (1) that not all terms mentioned there occur in CD; (ii) that certain
definitions differ; (ii) that not all the terms transmitted by Arab Archery are
accurate. See also Tabstrah, 94b-95b.

Texts (emended where necessary):

1006[Nushshab is a collective term applied to arrows complete with wood, fletchings,
and head. Each type has a name of its own. The singular of nushshab is
nushshábah. Nushshdb are also called siam (sing. sa), a term covering arrows of
all kinds, The wood is called gidh, the head nasl, the fletchings gudhadh, of
which the singular is qudkdhah. The fag is the nock into which the string fits
and which is called kaz in Turkish.]

[C: The bulges on each side of the nock are called sharkhdnt (sing. sharkh). The
nock sinew is called ugrak (frame, cuticle’) by the Arabs, and the part from the
base of the nock to the place where the fletchings begin is termed faráwan (? :
fardzán).*

1007The fine part on which the feathers are set is called agro (‘waist’),” and the
thread that is laid


over the end of them is called sharijah.* The portion of the arrow which runs
from below the-

1008
fletchings to the middle of the shaft is called the matz (‘body, main part")? or
kulyatàn: ('Kidneys"),* this portion being the thickest part of it. From this
portion to the arrowhead there is what is termed the sadr ("breast"), or
foreshaft.! The sinews at the arrowhead are known as risdf (sing.  rasafah).®]

[D: The socket (madkhal) of the arrowhead is the front end, or head (ra's), of
the arrow.*}

1009[C: Areas of sinew and the base of the fletchings should be elegantly painted
with sandarac and a fine thread wrapped over them—that is to say, the
fletchings, This treatment will protect them against rain.]

ED: There are various types of arrow. These include the ydsi, the mishgas,!
which has a long head, the yaghitg for war, the maydani for target-shooting
competitions (al-munadalah fi Lahdaf), the flight arrow (sabgi), the butt arrow
(amdji), and the cylindrical (? : timar).! The sbka (?)* is an arrow with a ring
(algak) at the end, while the kaz is the smi'rád ‘usfart which flies crosswise.’
Nabl is a term applied to long? arrows and to short, of which there are various
types such as the qalam, jarád, husban, and dadani.

1010[C: The misrá' is a long arrow with four feathers; the Aazwah is an arrow the
size of aspan;" the rakib? is a huge arrow with plenty of iron in it; the
rmi'balah? is an arrow with a broad head.]


a. The term is almost certainly Persian and most probably fardzdn meaning ‘the
rearmost part’ (ef. pishán, ‘the most forward part’ of anything). On faráz
‘space above a thing’, see Redhouse, Lexicon, s.v.

1011
164


APPENDIX 3 165

1012
. Not hafw as in Arab Archery, p. 103. See, inter alia, Mukhassas, VL p. 55.

. In the Mukhassas, VI, p. 55, sharijah is defined as ‘the sinew with which the
fletchings are attached’. The sinew which was placed over the heads of the
fletchings was termed kizamah (ibid.). By the ends of the fletchings are meant
the ends nearest to the nock. The heads of the fletchings were those nearest to
the arrowhead or those parts which were located where the haqu began, working
from the arrowhead upwards.

1013. In Arab Archery, p. 103, the main is defined as the foreshaft. The definition
given in Redhouse, Lexicon, s.v., is precisely the same as that which we are
given here: "The part of the shaft of an arrow from the middle of its length to
where the feathers begin.’

. Assuming that the reading is correct, it is hard to see why this part was so
called unless it was

1014
0— Nock (fq)



1015

Farawan(?)___ — A> Sinew (utrah) Waist (haqw) Fletching (rish) Back (matn) Shaft
(khashab) Breast(sadr)

1016
Ligaments (risaf) Head (nasl)


——

1017



1018Fic. $5. PARTS OF AN ARROW


awe ara a AMAN AA ach S

1019
Pr prog


a

1020
popp


because of its thickness which would make the shaft, when viewed longitudinally,
appear to bulge slightly on either side.

1021According to Arab Archery, p. 103, the breast is that part which runs from the
shaftment to the middle of the shaft. This docs not appear to have been the
case, for we read in the Mukhassas, VL, 54: ‘The zäfirah [not wafirah as in Arab
Archery] is that part of the shaft which comes below the fletchings. The part
which runs below that to the middle towards the thin portion of it is the
breast, but the term “breast” has begun to be applied only to that part of the
shaft which comes next to the arrowhead because it is to the fore when it is
shot. The rear of the shaft which comes next to the nock is termed ‘ajz.’ In
Arabic the term sadr is regularly applied to the front part of a thing. In the
Munjid, s.v., the zdfirah is more closely defined as the part which— working
from the atrowhead—the third of the shaft adjacent to the arrowhead.


- Mukhassas, Vl, p. 55: ‘The risáf are the sinews located above the socket.’
. The socket is called ru'z (ibid. Cf. Arab Archery, p. 103).

1022
Defined by one source as any arrowhead in which there is a prominent ridge on a
flat surface.  What this was is not entirely clear. It is mentioned by Taybughà
(p. 77) as being most suitable for gourd shooting.


. The word is not vocalized and therefore difficult to transcribe,

1023
Mi'rád is defined by Redhouse, Lexicon, s.v., as a ‘headless and featherless
arrow-shaft that often strikes sideways or with its middle part’. It is,
however, described in the Nihayah as follows: “This type of arrow leaves the bow
and flies sideways on to the mark, It will pass nothing without hitting it. I
will describe its appearance and how it works... You take a shaft and plane it
down. The nock should be very thin, It (the shaft?) should gradually thicken
until it reaches the shaftment and then thin out towards the end. It should next
be fletched with three feathers, one of which should be bigger than the other
two. Now shoot it, and it will fly sideways, If it does not, you can take it
that the nock is too light. Drill a hole in it then, and fill it with
lead. Shoot it again, and you will find that it flies transversely. The
advantage of this type of arrow lies in its use against birds. It will pass no
bird without hitting it’ (pp. 83-84). Arrows from Sind intended for use in this
way may be seen in the Ingo Simon Collection, Manchester Museum, No. 0.7720.


. Not by Taybugha.

1024. According to the Mukhassas, VI, p. 51, it was a cubit.

- As applied to arrowheads, this term indicated a thin, fine head (ibid.,
  p. 58).

1025. Defined as a ‘long, broad, arrowhead’ from which the arrow took its name
(ibid.). According


to one of Ibn Sidah’s authorities, it was like a javelin-, or spear-head, while
according to another, it was a head without a raised central ridge that was
absolutely flat and smooth.

1026
APPENDIX 4 FINGER-RECKONING


In the Middle East and throughout the Arab world, there existed a system whereby
numbers could be indicated by the positioning, or flexures, of the fingers. The
subject is treated in some detail in J. Rushka’s ‘Arabische Texte iiber das
Fingerrechnen’, Isl, X, 1920, pp. 87-119, Arab Archery, pp. 19-23, and ER
s.v. Hisáb al-'agd.

1027The system permitted numbers to be gonveyed by the use of one hand only, where
the middle,

ing-, and little fingers were used to indicate the numbers from I to 9, and the
thumb and index finger to show the tens. From the point of view of the archer
the various locks and grasps could easily be communicated in terms of this
system. Unfortunately, as already indicated in Ch. 10, the method used by
Taybughi differs in certain details from that shown in Arab Archery and
introduces an element of confusion, mainly as regards the two most important
locks of ‘63’ and ‘69’.

1028In Arab Archery there is a detailed description of the methods of indicating
numbers from 1 to roo, which is all that concerns the archer, Figs. 56 and $7
are based on this information, modified by the assertion of Taybughi that in
indicating 9 the tips of the fingers were to beturned in to the palm. It would
follow from this that the same principle also applied to 7 and 8.

Whatever the system, the locks or grasps referred to in our text can be
reconstructed without much difficulty. We must point out, however, that in Arab
Archery, p. 21, the illustration said to indicate 20 does in fact indicate 25.

1029
167


Odd, R1.  Pd

1030



1031APPENDIX 4 169



1032

20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

1033
FIG. 57. FINGER-RECKONING, (TENS) 10 TO 90


APPENDIX 5 THE RECONSTRUCTION OF TAYBUGHA’S BOW

1034
The bow specified by our author in Chapter 3 is of considerable interest because
its dimensions do not agree with those of any other composite bow of which we
have knowledge. In the history of the Middle East successive waves of invaders,
intruders, and immigrants from Central Asia have introduced different kinds of
bow. The forms of ancient types from the twenty-third century B.C. to the sixth
century B.C, have been well presented +y Yigael Yadin in his Art of Warfare in
Biblical Lands (1963), but no one has yet fully pieced together the subsequent
history of the bow in that area up to more recent times as far as available
specimens in museums and private collections permit.

Henry Balfour in his illustration ‘Morphological Classification of the Composite
Bow’ (FRAI, LI, 1921, p. 309, Fig. 17) does show a relationship between the
various forms, but without any detailed measurements which might enable us to
check one type against another, In attempting to reconstruct his researches and
supply missing data we have been greatly hampered by lack of access to some of
the weapons he had found. Certain important private collections have been broken
up and sold, with the result that we do not know what has become of various rare
examples of earlier bows. There are, therefore, wide gaps in our knowledge. This
being so, we need not explain the importance of unearthing the dimensions of a
hitherto unknown form of composite.

1035Our bow may directly descend from some particular Central Asian type, though we
have no direct evidence to support the hypothesis. Equally, it may have been
developed under any, or many, of a variety of influences that had accumulated
there from Ayyübid to Mameluke times or even earlier. If pressed to relate it to
any known form of composite, we would suggest that its resemblance to a
Sino-Tartar (see Fig. 26,c) with shortened ears is the closest conceivable, and
this is as far as we can go.

From the somewhat scanty information available in the Ghunyah Edward McEwen
graciously undertook to attempt a reconstruction for us. In so doing he followed
the Ottoman practice of hollowing the horn slightly and then made the wooden
core—of maple—correspondingly convex.  Both surfaces were deeply scored to give
greater purchase to the glue. The grip section was made from a piece of oak and
the ears from beech strengthened with inserts of horn, The veneer applied to the
sinew backing was taken from the inner bark of white poplar. One unknown factor
proved to be the amount of reflex allowed in the grip. An interesting point
which emerged from the reconstruction was that when a string of the specified
length (p. 21 above) was fitted, the resultant bracing height was 71 in. It was
found, however, that the reflex could be reduced, as also the angle of the siyaA
in relation to the working part of the limb, to achieve the same result, Which
form was the original, we cannot say, and it is doubtful whether the problem,
like that of the grip, will ever be resolved with any certainty.

1036Despite the short styahs, the bow is of an efficient design and well suited to
hunting or warfare as we have proved in field trials. With a weight of about 50
Ib. at full draw it shot a 30-in. arrow over a distance of 285 yards. This is a
satisfactory performance by any standards.


170

1037
APPENDIX 5 171


Plate 18 (1) shows the bow in the shape to which it settled after reasonable
use. It had, of course, been reflexed into a complete circle during the final
stages of manufacture. In (2) we see the bow strung and ready for usc. It has a
pleasing appearance, and we may observe that it is often the case that if a bow
looks well, its design is good. In (3) the bow is shown on a tiller at the full
draw of 30 in. It should be noted that a correctly designed bow at full draw
should have a string at right-angles to the ear so that maximum advantage may be
taken of the leverage afforded by the siya.

1038
We express our sincere thanks to Mr. McEwen for his interest and trouble in
producing this excellent reconstruction.


APPENDIX 6 QABAQ AND QIGHAJ

1039
(a) Qabag. From the text it will be gathered that gabag-shooting consisted in
shooting from horseback at an elevated mark affixed to the top of a mast. From
the name of the exercise (Turk.  gabag/kabak, ‘gourd’) we can take it that the
mark was originally a gourd, but, as we have cbserved (p. 77), the term was
subsequently applied to targets of a different and often more sophisticated
nature, such as containers for doves.

From the part, originally consisting of the gourd, the use of the term gabag
seems to have been transferred to the whole, consisting of the mast together
with its mounted target, and to have been replaced in the sense of ‘gourd’ by
the Arabic equivalent gar‘ak. Such at any rate is the impression to be gained
from the Mameluke historian, Abu l-Mahasin Ibn Taghribirdi (1409- 1410?-1470),
son of a most distinguished commander-in-chief, whose word in this matter can be
wholly relied upon (an-Nujim az-záhirah, Cairo edn., VIII, p. 6). According to
this author the gabag was a long pole surmounted by a gourd (gar‘ah) which
served as the horse archer’s ‘pigeon-box’ target. Successful shooting would earn
an archer not only a befitting robe of honour, but also the precious *cage'—if
we may call it such.

1040A different definition is given by an equally famous Mameluke historian,
al-Magrizi (1346- 1442), who was, however, likely to be less well informed on
the matter. His understanding of the term gabag was a high mast surmounted by a
wooden ring, or hoop, through which archers shot at a target. Whether his
archers were mounted or not is uncertain, for on this point his text is
ambiguous in that a verb (wagafa) is used which may mean either ‘to stand’ or
‘to come to a halt’, irrespective of whether the subject is mounted or on foot
(Khigaz, III, p. 180). Moreover, we cannot exclude the possibility that a simple
textual corruption obscures the function of wagafa as a mere verb of duration or
continuity (see Latham, BSOAS, XXXII, 1969, pp. 259-60).  Whatever the truth of
the matter, al-Maqrizi’s reference to the substitution of the mast and gourd by
a spear and hoop for training purposes induces the speculation whether he did
not confuse a means of practice with gabag-shooting proper. Alternatively, it
may be that in addition to its particular and restricted sense the expression
‘gabag-shooting’ was also used in a looser and more general sense, Indeed, in
the opening paragraph of our chapter the expression does occur with the extended
meaning ‘shooting at an elevated target’, albeit that ‘from horseback’ is
implicit.

(b) Qighaj. According to glosses in CD (see references, p. 77), the term derives
from a Turkish word meaning ‘slant, slanting, inclined, sloping, oblique’
(za’rib [sic], muwarrab, má'il). If it is justifiable, as it would appear, to
associate the borrowing with the Turkish Aigag in the sense ‘slope of a roof? or
‘out of true’ (Radioff, IT, col. 692), then the spelling gayghaj or gighaj which
occur in a number of MSS, including the early B?, are preferable from the point
of view of phonetic transcription to gaygaj or gigaj. Reinaud, transliterating
only from consonants, renders the term &ycadj (i.e. gigaj) and he may not be
unjustified, for ky-kaj is encountered in Lady Sheil’s Glimpses of Life and
Manners in Persia (London, 1856, p. 78). At all events, there is nothing

1041
172


APPENDIX 6 173

1042
unusual about the shift gh (g)>q, which is a common enough feature even in the
dialects of nomadic Arabs.


Whether the word as we have it is intended to describe the action of shooting in
an inclined plane or the position of the archer when making the shot, or, less
probably, the angle at which the target was set, is debatable. If we accept the
first possibility, the term is presumably intended to convey the notion that the
shot is not made in a horizontal plane. Neither, of course, is the shot so made
in the case of the gourd, but since shooting downwards from horseback at a
target at ground level is of greater practical importance, it is likely to have
antedated gourd-shooting and therefore established a prior claim to the
name. However that may be, what is fairly certain is that its original meaning
was gradually lost, for in a number of manuscript sources of our acquaintance
the grammatical treatment of the word and context suggest that it denoted some
kind of target. Reinaud also formed this impression and from the evidence at his
disposal inclined to the view that it was a butt made of a wicker basket filled
with sand (ibid., p. 221).  The explanation that springs most readily to mind is
one of semantic development; it is easy to see how gighaj by analogy with qabag
could come to denote the target and, equally, how 'gzghaj- shooting’ acquired
the looser and more general sense given in our text of ‘shooting downwards from
horseback’. It is less easy to explain Morier’s understanding of the term in
nineteenth- century Persia (Second Journey through Persia, London, 1818,
p. 169). The description that he gives in this connexion is that of an exercise
in which one group of horsemen in simulated flight before another suddenly turn
their heads and with agility transfix their pursuers.

1043The practical value of shooting at a ground target from horseback is obvious and
it is almost otiose to point out its application to the needs of hunting and
warfare.


GUIDE TO ENGLISH TECHNICAL TERMINOLOGY

1044
In the following list of selected words and phrases we are mainly concerned to
furnish the


comprehensive glossary in Target Archery (pp. 482-524) we nevertheless recommend
as an authoritative source.

1045
ANCHOR, v.: to lodge the drawing hand in a firm and constant position at full
draw so ag to ensure accuracy of aim,

ANCHOR-POINT: point on the body, usually part of the face, where the drawing
hand is lodged at full draw.

1046ARM: (ofthe bow) upper limb,

ARROW, Parts of: Breast, FLETCHING, Foor, FORESHAFT, Heap, Heer, Nocx,
SHAFT/STELE, SHAFTMENT, qq.v.

1047ARROW-GUIDE: device by which short arrows or darts may be shot from inside the
grip of a full-drawn bow of greater draught than that otherwise permitted by the
length of the missiles.

ARROWHEAD: striking end of an arrow made of a piece of hard material fitted
separately to the front of a shaft.

1048ARROW-PASS: the point at the top of a bow's grip agaiust which the arrow rests
when nocked and in place for shooting.

BACK, n.: convex surface of a braced bow.

1049BACKED: (bow) having material attached to its back so as to strengthen it or
improve cast.

BARRELLED: (arrow) tapering from the centre towards each end.

1050BELLY: concave surface of a braced bow.

BELT-AND-CLAW: see DRAWING-STRAP.

1051BLUNT: (arrowhead) having a blunt, flat tip, designed to prevent penetration.

Bort: short, and usually heavy, arrow for use with a crossbow, See also QUARREL.

1052Bow, Parts of: BACK, BELLY, Lima, NECK, Nock, Tir, qq.v.

Bow-case: holder, usually of leather, in which a bow is carried,

1053BOW-HAND/ARM: hand/arm which holds the bow's grip when shooting (Jeft in the
case of a right-handed archer),

BOW-WEIGHT: see DRAW-WEIGHT,

1054BRACE, v.: to fit the string to a flexed bow; synon, with STRING.

BRACING-BOARD: device to facilitate the bracing of strong or difficult bows.

1055BRACING HEIGHT: see HEIGHT OF A BOWSTRING,

BREAST: (of an arrow) the shaft immediately in front of the feathers or
fletching, but on the sense in Arabic, see Glossary s.v. SADR.

1056BREASTED: (arrow) thickest at the breast. On the sense in Arabic see Glossary
s.v. MUSADDAR.

BROADHEAD: flat, pointed arrowhead with sharp edges.

1057
174


GUIDE TO ENGLISH TECHNICAL TERMINOLOGY 175

1058
Cast: capacity of a bow to discharge its missile.

CLEAN: (the loose) characterized by correct disengagement of the thumb from the
bowstring so that the passage of the latter is in no way obstructed or retarded.

1059CoMPOSITE: bow, the construction of which is based on the union of different
materials, The Asiatic composite was formed of horn and sinew bonded with glue
on a wooden core.

Creep: slight nosing forward of the arrow at full draw just before the loose.

1060Crosspow: bow fitted to a stock and drawn by the archer, with or without
mechanical assistance, but held and released by a mechanism.

DART: 1. arrow used with an arrow-guide; 2. short arrow-like missile.

1061DRAUGHT: (of bow, arrow) amount or length drawn.

Draw, v.: to pull back the string of a bow, usually for the purpose of shooting
it,

1062Draw, o.: 1. act, manner, technique, of drawing; 2. distance between the back of
a bow and its string at the moment of shooting,

DRAW-WEIGHT: force in pounds required to draw a bow to the length of its
appropriate arrow.

1063DRAWING HAND/ARM: hand/arm which draws the bowstring (right in the case of a
tight-handed archer). :

DRAWING-STRAP: looped strap with a two-hooked claw; it is normally belted around
the waist to enable one to draw the string of certain types of crossbow. (See
Fig. 29.)

1064Ear: the rod-like tip of an Oriental bow containing the nock, It is nor
synonymous with siyah since it does not apply to the ridged portion, but it is
often used loosely as such.

FISHER LOOSE: three-finger lock with string held obliquely.

1065FLETCHING: 1. feathers, or vanes, attached to an arrow’s shaft to enable it to
fly steadily and head first; 2, feather, or vane, used for this purpose.

FLIGHT ARROW: arrow designed for flight shooting, q.v.

1066FLIGHT BOW: bow designed to impart the highest possible velocity to an arrow for
the purpose of achieving the greatest possible distance.

FLIGHT SHOOTING: shooting for the purpose of attaining the greatest possible
distance with an arrow.

1067FLIRT: to jump suddenly from the correct line of flight (arrow).

FOLLOW THROUGH, V.: to continue the act and tension of Shooting from the moment
the atrow leaves the string until it has sped. (See pp. 68-70.)

1068Foot: (of arrow shaft) the few inches or so adjacent to the head.

FoRESHAFT: front half of an arrow's shaft.

1069FULL DRAW: normal maximum length to which an arrow is drawn in its appropriate
bow.

Gan: to fly erratically, unsteadily, as a result of some fault in equipment or
technique (arrow).

1070GRASP: see GRIP, 2 and 3, and remark in parenthesis.

Grip: 1. handle of bow; 2. grasp of bow-hand on handle; 3. manner of grasping
the handle.  (Because of the danger of ambiguity we tend to avoid the use of the
word in senses 2 and 3.)

1071GROUP, v.: to place arrows close together in a target. :

GUIDE: see ARROW-GUIDE,

1072HAND BOW: bow drawn, held, and released entirely by the strength of the archer
(as distinct from a crossbow, for instance).

HANDLE: part of the bow grasped by the hand during shooting, grip.

1073HEAD: see ARROWHEAD.

Heavy: (bow) having a relatively high weight. See DRAW-WEIGHT.

1074Hee: (of an arrow) that section of the shaft which lies between the rear end of
the fletching and the beginning of the nock.

HEIGHT OF A 8OWSTRING: the distance between the grip and string of a braced bow.

1075HoLp, v.: to pause at full draw before releasing.


176 GUIDE TO ENGLISH TECHNICAL TERMINOLOGY

1076
Knee: the relatively sharp recurve in the ridged section of the siyah found in
certain types of Oriental bow.

Lec: (of the bow) lower limb.

1077LieHr: (bow) having a relatively low weight. See DRAw-WEIGHT.

LiwB: that part of a bow which extends from the grip to the tip, there being two
limbs distin- guished as ‘upper’ and ‘lower’,

1078Lock: r. the manner in which the thumb and/or fingers are applied to the
bowstring in order to draw the bow; 2. (of a crossbow) the mechanism which holds
the draw-string and releases it when the trigger is operated.

LowcBOow: the traditional old English wooden bow of 6 ft. or more in
length. N.B. ‘long bow?  in Arabic denotes a bow which shoots full-length arrows
(see Glossary s.v. SAHM Tawit).

1079Loose, n.: act of releasing a drawn bowstring. N.B.: the word is often, but
erroneously, used to denote the Jock, q.v.

Loose, v.: to release a drawn bowstring.

1080MEDITERRANEAN LOOSE: the European lock in which the first three finger-tips lie
on the string with the nock between the first and second.

NECK: see Glossary s.v. ‘Ung.

1081NOCK,n.: I. (ofa bow) the notch in the tip into which the loop of the string
fits; 2. (of an arrow) the notch in the rear end into which the bowstring fits.

Nock, v.: to fit an arrow on to the string.

1082NOCKPIECE: section of hard material containing the notch which is separately
fitted to the butt of an arrow's shaft.

NOCKING-POINT: point on the bowstring where the arrow should be nocked.

1083Nut: (ofa crossbow) rotating cylindrical device extensively found in the stocks
of crossbows.  One part of the circumference is shaped to hold the drawn string,
and an opposite part notched to take the sere of the trigger mechanism, (See
Fig. 4.)

QUARREL: heavy bolt for a crossbow, having, as a rule, a head that is square or
triangular in cross-section and a tip which, when viewed from the side, presents
the shape of a roughly equilateral triangle; there are a number of kinds,

1084RATE OF RECOVERY: see RECOVERY.

RECOVER, instrans. v.: 1. (limbs of a drawn bow) to spring back into the
position occupied before the draw; 2. (limbs of a bow unbraced after use) to
regain the reflexed form which they had before bracing.

1085RECOVERY, RATE OF RECOVERY: time taken by a bow to recover.

RECURVE, n.: (in a bow) curvature in the opposite direction to that taken by the
drawn bow.  Usually it denotes the end of a limb where the recurve can be either
rigid or ‘working’ i.e.  losing some of its bend when the bow is drawn.

1086RECURVED: curving in the opposite direction to that taken by the drawn bow. .

REFLEX: (in the working part of the limb and/or grip of a bow) curvature in the
opposite direction to that to which the bow is flexed for bracing. It is seen in
the unstrung bow.

1087SELF BOW: bow made of a single stave of wood.

Snuarr: main body of an arrow.

1088SHAFTMENT: [Anglo-Saxon: sceaft (shaft) + mund (hand)] that part of an arrow’s
shaft to which.  the fletchings are fitted.

SHarp; (the loose) clean and quick without ioss of tension caused by creep.

1089SrvaH: sce Glossary s.v.

SrasH, v.: to accomplish a swift, uninterrupted, and clean loose.

1090SLUGGISH: (the loose) dead, i.c. slow with possible loss of tension.

SNATCH: to increase the draw as the loose is made. (in 7"s vocabulary : to
accomplish the loose with a brief pause immediately followed by an imperceptible
snatch as one comes to full drat.)

1091
GUIDE TO ENGLISH TECHNICAL TERMINOLOGY 177


STELE: synon. with SHAFT, q.v.

1092STRING: synon. with BRACE, q.v.

TANG: (of an arrowhead) the ‘tongue’, i.e. shank for insertion into the shaft.

1093TARGET: a bounded surface serving as a mark at which to shoot.

TARGET HEAD: head used for target shooting, ogival or triangular in silhouette,
circular or polygonal in cross-section.

1094‘TARGET SPOT: any specified point on a target face which the archer aims to hit.

TILLER, n.: wooden stave used by a bowyer, one end of which is hollowed to fit
against the grip of a bow, while notches cut into the surface of the stave
permit the string to be drawn and held at varying distances, so that the form
and curvature of the bow may be studied. (See Plate 18.)

1095TILLERING: process of adjusting, with the aid of a tiller, the width and
thickness of the limbs ofa bow so that the correct curvature and balance may be
achieved when the bow is drawn.

Tir: (of a bow) extremity.

1096WAR HEAD: arrowhead for use in war; commonly a triangular spike, square or
triangular in cross-section.

WEIGH, trans. v.: to ascertain the draw-weight of a bow.

1097WEIGHT: see DRAW-WEIGHT.

WORKING (PART OF THE) LIMB: that section of a bow’s limb which takes the bend
when the bow is drawn (as opposed to the siyah, which remains rigid).

1098
ARABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY


This glossary is principally intended to supply definitions which are valid for
our text, and, in

1099the interests of simplicity and economy of space, it is only in exceptional
cases that reference js

made to any additional or different meaning(s) which a given term may have
elsewhere in archery literature.  Attention is drawn to the following points:

1100(i) For the benefit of non-Arabists the terms are arranged alphabetically, not
according to roots.  In a few cases where vowels are uncertain we have had to
supply them on the basis of our own judgement,

Gi) Because they are of special interest to the archer a small proportion of
terms from other sources are incorporated. These are marked with an asterisk
(*};

1101(iii) The language from which a term, if not of Arabic origin, is borrowed or
derived is indicated in square brackets ( ]. Details are only given where the
etymology wil! not be obvious to the orientalist or differs from that given
elsewhere.

(v) The term ‘bow’ is to be taken as meaning ‘COMPOSITE bow’ unless there is any
indication to the contrary.

1102(v) Left-handed archers should exercise caution where mention is made of ‘left’
and ‘right’.


ABBREVIATIONS adj. adjective Pers, Persian advbl. adverbial phr. phrase
Ar. Arabic pl. plural coll. collective prep. preposition compar, comparative
q.v. quod vide (wbich, see) descr. described, description sing. singular disc'd
discussed S.V. sub verbo (under the word) disc'n discussion synon. synonymous
fem, feminine T Taybugha fr. from tr, transitive intr. intransitive
Turk. Turkish masc, masculine v. verb n, noun v.n. verbal noun opp. opposite
w. ref. to with reference to

1103
ADARA: 1. to flex (the limbs of a bow to brace it); 2. to spin (an arrow
horizontally on the finger-nails to test its shaft for trueness; sce p. 30).

AFLATA: 1. to loose, release (an arrow); by the end of the fourtcenth century
the use of the v.  in this sense was probably an archaism in Egypt and Syria;
T's v. is almost invariably ATLAQ4; 2. to slip (the reins of one’s horse when
shooting or about to shoot).

1104
178


ARABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY 179

1105
AHWAL: 'askant, squint-eyed’, a method of binocular aiming (pp. 58, 61).

A'IMMAH; sce IMAM.

1106ÁJRÀ: ‘to ron’ an arrow over some part of the thumb of the drawing hand (so as
to give the arrow a natural guide (majra) along which to travel at the loosc).

AKHAFFAR-RUL: to take one's weight off the [left] foot (in the flight shooting
stance).

1107AKHYTA'A: to miss the mark.

AXTAF(?): see p. 26 & dise’n, p. 32.

1108"ALAMAH: mark at which to shoot.

‘Axi: ‘high’, deep (fletchings w. ref. to their extension outward from the
shaftment); opp. L&TI'.

1109AMA] [Pers.]: butt.

AMAJTYYAH, pl. AMAJIYYAT: butt arrow.

1110'AMUD: stock (of a crossbow).

ANGUSHTVAN: see KUSHTUWAN (ft. ANKUSHTUWAN).

1111ANKA: 1. to inflict injury (mortal or otherwise), hence 2. to be effective
(arrow, bow, etc.)  for the purpose intended, irrespective of the nature of that
purpose, which need not— as in flight shooting, for instance—entail any intent
to kill or injure.

"AQas: ‘sinew’, the sinew backing (of a bow).

1112"AQADA (v.n. ‘AQD): I, to Knot (a bowstring); 2. to reckon, compute, numbers by
means of finger flexures (Appendix 4, Figs. 56, 57); 3. to arrange as in
reckoning (the fingers and thumb of one hand when grasping an arrow, securing it
against the grip of the bow when nocking, etc.); 4. to lock, put a lock on (the
bowstring (‘ALA L-WATR) for the purpose of drawing it); used in conjunction with
a numeral to indicate exact position of the fingers, e.g.  ‘A. TIS'AH WA-SITTIN
to lock ‘69’. (See Ch. 10.)

Agama: (in bracing a highly reflexed bow) ‘to straighten’, by retraction of the
siyahs from the reflexed position, the working parts of the limbs prior to
flexing.

1113“AQARA (v.n. 'AQR): to blister, cause blistering (an arrow to the thumb or index
finger, a grip to the bow hand).

‘AQD: 1x. — (pl. ‘uqtp): the lock, kind of lock, locking; see 'AQADA 4. &
Ch. 10; kinds of lock explained in the Ghunyah are: AL-'A. AL-EAHRAMI, Bahrüm's
lock (p. 53); AL~ KHUSRAWANI, Chosroes’ lock (p. 53); ‘A. AL-LUZÜM, the clinging
lock (used to hold the shaft against the grip of the bow when nocking, p. 53);
—— AR-RADIF, the pillion lock (p. 53); ~—— AS-SAQALIBAH, the Slav lock (p. 53);
—— THALATHAH WA-SITTIN, the lock of ‘63’ (pp.  53» 54); —— TIS'AH. WA-SITTIN,
the lock of ‘69’ (ibid.), etc. 2. the fingers of the drawing hand when locked on
the string; 3. linear measure of very short (3 in. or less), but indeter-
minate, length.

1114“AQQABA: to back with sinew (a bow).

'"Anip: ‘broad’, not cylindrical (mdawwar), but characterized by broad lateral
surfaces (a bow’s grip; p. 8).

1115ARKHA: is relax (tr.), hold loosely and without tension (any part of the body
which should not be tensed in shooting).

ASABA: to hit (the mark), shoot accurately.

1116ASBAQ (compar. adj.): giving greater range (fletchings to arrows). Cf. SIBAQ.

ASBASALARI [Pers.]: |commander's', name of an undefined type of arrow-guide,

1117ATLAQA: 1. to loose, release (an arrow, dart, bolt, etc); N.B. T rarely uses
AFLATA, q.v.; 2. (of a horse) to give it its head.

ATRAD LI-S-SAHM: improving cast (a bowstring, thumb-guard, etc.). The use of
this expression (compounded of compar. adj. of TARID, prep., and n.) is very
common,

1118*AWAMID AS-SIBAQ: flight-shooting markers (p. 109). i

*Awsàr (pL): the different sections from which the framework of the bow is
 formed (limbs,

1119siyah, grip). (See Appendix 2.)



1120

meme a acre 4A Sed Ned ees, SEL OUI

1121
AWTARA; to brace, string (a bow). N.B.: not synon. with WATARA (see MAWTOR).

AWWAL WAFA’: see Wara’,

1122AYMAN: ‘right-handed’, fletching with a natural curve to the right when viewed
from the nock (Fig. 16). N.B.: in English practice T's right-handed feather
would be described as left.  handed because of the different angle from which it
would be viewed.

Aysar: ‘left-handed’, opp. AYMAN, q.v.

1123BA’, pl. BA‘AT: spam of the outstretched arms, arm-span (almost 2 metres, See
Appendix L).

BADAN: r. thickest part (of an arrowhead, shaft, etc.); 2. stele, shaft (of an
arrow, bolt, ttc.).

1124*BADDADA: opp. JAMA'A, q.v. (Wadth, fo. 32a).

BAHRAMI: see 'AQp E,

1125BawpÜQ: undefined type of crossbow.

BaQQAM: brazil-wood,

1126Bags: boxwood.

BansáQ: see BansuaQ.

1127BansHAQ (on various spellings, etc., see Ch. 17, n. 16) [Pers.]: a device for
strengthening a point of weakness in the limb of a bow to make bracing
possible. It appears to have been a ‘strap, cord’, possibly tied, or otherwise
formed, into a loop, which could thus be slipped over the siyah and in some way
tightened, (See pp. 93, 99.)

Bari (for Baqi): ‘slow’, an arrow failing to traverse about 75 yds. in less than
1} sec. (see Ch, 25, sect. 4 & n. 6); B. AL-ITLAQ: giving a slow loose (lock on
a bowstring).

1128BATN, pl. BUTÜN: r. (ofa bow) the belly, i.e, its concave surface when braced;
2. (of a feather) the ventral surface,

BATTIYYAH: a practice ‘drum’ used by the archer in training (disc'd, p. 156).

1129BavAp: used absolutely (e.g. p. 122) or in advbl. phrases KASHF* L-B. (p. 128,
etc.) and warA' p.  (p. 131) w. ref. to the attainment of maximum draught by an
archer using a full-length arrow with the ‘greater draw" (NIHAYAH, q.v.); the
term is fully disc'd, pp. 127-29; B. AR- RIJL: instep,

BAYRAM SHAH [Pers.]: ‘King Bayram’, name of an undefined type of arrow-guide.

1130Bayt: 1, —~ (pl. BUYÜUT), limb of a bow (cf. Pers. khdne~ye kaman ‘house of the
bow’, i.c.  limb); AL-B. AL-A'LA, or B. AL-YAD, of B. AR-RAMY: the upper limb,
as opposed to AL-B.  AL-ASFAL, Or B. AR-RIJL (Ot *B. AL-HATT, B. AL-ISQAT; sce
Appendix 2); the lower limb; AL-B. AD-DA Ie: ‘the weak(er) limb’, said of the
upper limb because, being the longer, it takes more bend than the lower, which
is accordingly AL-B. AsH-SHADID: ‘the strong(er) limb’ (the term may, of course,
refer to either limb if it is to be taken in its literal sense); z. ‘house’,
holder in the nut of a crossbow for catching the string.

*BAZLAH: socketed head (? of a crossbow bolt 3 P. 30).

1131BIDÀYAH: the first ("starting point’) of three possible positions for the
arrowhead at full draw, being that which affords its user minimum draught
(disc'd, pp. 127-29). Used absolutely, it is synon. with ward’ 5. which may
conveniently be translated as the ‘lesser’ draw.

BirjAs (Pers.J: a ring or hoop mounted on a spear for use in lance exercises,
Under certain circumstances it may also have served as a target for archers in
training. (See pp. 76, 83-84.)

1132*BIRÜN: a ring with a nail-like projection for shooting nockless arrows. (See
 p. 143.)

BuNDUQ: pellet, ball (shot from a bow by one means or another). ; "

1133CHANGAL-1 BAZ (? spelled jinkilbdz [Pers.]): *falcon's talons’, manner of
grasping, used in flight shooting (Fig. 20; p. 44; disc'd, P- 46). i

CHILLaH [Pers. with Ar. spellings jila, jila, chuld, etc.]: bowstring of silk
twisted lengthwise from new, wound silk of high quality. ;

1134Dar'aH: cast (of a bow). See also ATRAD and TARD.


*DAFFAH: ‘side’, that part of the bow's limb which lies next to the grip;
 DAFFATA L-FÜQ: the

1135
AKABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY 181


cusps of the nock; on the occurrence of the same expression (?) w. ref, to the
bow, see Appendix 2, note f.

1136DAKHIL, DAKHILI: sce NAZAR.

*Dastcau [Pers.]: basically, a kind of slotted board used to adjust a bow to its
proper curvature.  (See Klopsteg, Fig. 22.)

1137DAWARAN: 1. act of turning, whence HASAN AD-D.: rotating evenly (arrows when
spun to test for trueness, see p. 30); 2. (of a bow) act of springing back into
its unbraced or undrawn position, whence SUR'AT AD-D.: speed of recovery.

*Dawpay: (spelling—which is that given in Arab Archery—and etymology are
uncertain, but it is possible that the word is düdan fr. Pers. dé ‘two’ + -ddn
‘receptacle’, the reference being to some form of arrow-guide capable of
projecting two darts simultaneously, Cf.  dudani, p. 29): name of a class of
darts for use with an arrow-guide measuring about to in.

1138DrsTGAH: see DastGAH,

DHANAB, pl. ADHNAB: tail-feathers (used in fletching).

1139DHIRÀ': cubit, whence DH, AL-'AMAL AN-NAJJARL, of DH. AL-'AMAL LI-N-NAJJARIN,
‘the car- penters’ cubit', said by T to be synon. with ADH-DH. AL-HASHIMI, ‘the
Hashimi cubit’, a linear measure of 26-18 in. (66-5 cm.). (See Appendix r.)

DIHĀN: (in manufacture) the process of painting the finished bow.

1140DiMAK [Pers. ‘littie face'?] (or DAYMAK?): arrow-pass.

DIRHAM BI-D-DIMISHQI: ‘dirham, Damascus weight’, a weight of 47-6 grains (3:086
grams).  (See Appendix 1.)

1141*DÜDANi: see s.v. DAWDAN and p. 29.

DustTAr [possibly fr. Pers. andákh (»andásh?) + -tår ‘that which throws,
shoots’; cf. loss of an- in kushtuwan, q.v.]: 1. the working part of the limb of
a bow (Fig. 5 & p. 11); D. AR-RIJL: the lower d.; D. AL-YAD: the upper d.;
2. loosely, the limb of a bow.

1142FAHLAH (fr. fahi ‘stallion, champion’, the fem. being best explained by
assimilation to fem. n.  gaws, bow): ‘superb’, name of a Syrian war bow said by
T to have been the best available in bis day.

FARAKA: I. to twist (the grip in loosing, arrow-guide in drawing, etc.); 2. to
accomplish the loose with a farkah, q.v.

1143Farp: nock of a bow.

FaRKAH: a ‘twist’ of the drawing hand executed at the loose so as to sweep the
index finger clear of the string (explanation, p. 66).

1144*FaTHAH, FATHAH BI-SH-SHAMAL: a form of follow-through (Ch. 14) consisting in a
stable forward movement of the bow hand as arms and chest are spread at the
loose. (See p. 41.)

FAWWAQA: to nock an arrow.

1145*FILQ: a bow consisting of a single stave split lengthwise and spliced. (See
 p. 10.)

FtqQ, pl. FUWAQ: nock of an arrow; synon. with KAz (q.v.) except where it is
necessary to differentiate between the nockpiece and the nock, in which case T
clearly uses r. for the former and K. for the latter.

1146FuTÜR AL~ITLAQ: sluggish loose.

GHAMAZA: to exert pressure on (the nock of an arrow in locking).

1147GHaRAD: I. target; loosely used as a synonym of ‘a/dmah or hadaf; 2. target spot
as opposed to target face (hadaf), the latter being the whole of which the
former is part.

GHIZLAN: ‘gazelles’, name of an unidentified type of fletchings (p. 26; disc'd,
p. 32).

1148HapnaF, pl. AHDAF: 1. target; 2. target face (as opposed to the target spot,
gharad); 3. *AL-H, AT-TAMAM: ‘the full target’, a target at long range (284-328
yds.?); see p. 141.

HÁDD AN-NAFDAH BI-L-ITLÀQ: having a sharp, clean, loose (fight archer), (See
Ch. r9, n. 6.)

1149Hapip: x. armour; 2. (coll., sing. HADIDAH) arrowhead.

HALA: to be slender, thin (arrow, shaft).

1150
182 ARABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY


HALAWAT AL-JADHB: 'pleasantness afforded by drawing’, that quality in a bow
which enables the user to draw it without strain or discomfort.

1151HALLALA: to form a crescent near the ear with the thumb and finger of the
drawing hand as a sequence to disengagement at the loose. (See pp. 64, 131 &
frontispiece.).

HALQAH: Ir. ‘curve’ to which a bow is bent in manufacture (p. 8) or in bracing;
2. —— (pl.  HALAQAT: a loop of twine, used when folded in two around a bowstring
as a holder from which to shoot a nockless arrow; 3. * (pl. HALAQ) the rounded
notch in the nockpiece of an arrow. (Sce p. 24 & Fig. 1 5.)

1152Harsi: designed, or intended, for use in war, battle (arrowheads, arrows, bows,
techniques, etc.).

HARBIYYAT: war arrows.

1153HARRAFA: to put, hold, in an oblique position (the fingers when locking,
gripping the bow; the body when addressing oneself to the target).

HASHIMI: see Dur,

1154HaTTA: to unbrace.

HATTA MIN DAF‘AT AL-QAWs: to reduce the cast of a bow.

1155HAWWALA: to sight, aim, by the 'askant" method, See AHWAL.

HAYDARI(?): ifa correct reading, the name of an unidentified type of arrowhead
(see Ch, 5, n. 9). In the context the process of elimination leads us to suspect
a hunting type, possibly a broadhead, in which case g. could be a copyist's
error for jamwari ‘animal’ [adj. fr. Pers,

1156Jánvar + -1], i.e. for use against animals,

HAYL: x. the strength required of an archer to draw a bow; 2. draw-weight (of a
bow; see p. xxv).

1157Hazm: (in manufacture) process of binding the horn lining to the wooden core of
the bow after the two have been glued together and before the application of
sinew to the back,

Hazz: 1. the skin crease on the palmar surface of a finger- or thumb-joint;
AL.-H. AL-AWWAL: the ‘first crease’, between the base of the finger and the
palm, being the metacarpo- phalangeal crease (in our terminology, the proximal);
—~ ATH-THAN!: the ‘second crease’, the proximal interphalangeal crease (in our
terminology, the middle); —— AL-AKHIR: the ‘last crease’, the distal
interphalangeal crease (in our terminology, the distal); 2. the trans- verse
line formed by the juxtaposition, at corresponding levels, of two or more such
creases.

1158*HUSBAN (coll.): x. ‘hailstones’ (?), name of darts about 15 in. long; 2. a kind
of arrow-guide for the projection of such darts 3 see p. 150.

IBRANJAK (*alsa IBRANJAQ; IFRANJAK in the Wadih) [Pers. abranjan +. -ak "little
bracelet’?]: I, a roughly semicircular Strip, or sliver, of hard material
(hardwood, bone, etc.) running round the belly of a bow's grip and filling the
gap left in manufacture between the upper and lower sections of horn lining (see
p. 14); it is the Turk. chekk ; 2. loosely, the belly of the

1159



1160grip.

"IDRÁR: act of spinning an arrow horizontally on the finger-nails to test its
shaft for trueness.  (See p. 30.)

1161IDTARABA: 1. to flirt (intr. v., an arrow); 2. to go out of control (a bow when
loosed); 3. I. Fi JARYIHI: to gallop uncollectedly (a horse).

IFLAT: act of loosing, the loose. See AFLATA, I & ATLAQA, I.

1162*IFRANJAK: sec IBRANJAK,

*IJAZAH: licence to practise as a master archer (pp. 155, 156).

1163IkHràs: (ofa bowstring) act of giving a clean loose.

IKHTALASA: to snatch, use the snatched loose. N.R.: T’s snatched loose
(mukhtalas) differs from that of Mustafa Kani (ikhtilās). (See detailed disc’n,
pp. 66-67.)

1164IRHTIYĀRĪ: eclectic {an archer who, following at-Tabari, did not adhere
exclusively to any one


ARABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY 183

1165
of the three accepted systems of archery (see Ch. 23), but selected from their
teachings those best suited to his physical needs).

IMAM, pl. A'IMMAH: in the Ghunyah, an imam of archery is the supposed founder of
a system of shooting. On the four accepted systems, see Ch. 23.

1166IMTATTA: to stretch (intr. v., a bowstring under the tension of a braced bow).

INFADH: penetrative power (of arrow, arrowhead, etc.).

1167INFITÀQ: X. I. AL-'AQD: breaking of the skin on the fingers of the drawing hand;
2. 1. AL- QABDAH: Slashing sustained by the fingers of the bow-hand (from the
string); 3. 1, AL-BATN: hernia, rupture.

INHARAFA: to assume an oblique position (an archer addressing himself to the
mark). (See p.  102.) .

1168InqiNa’: 1. stooping posture resulting from failure to hold the back straight
and firm; z, *the state, condition, of a bow when braced. (See Appendix 2.)

INQILAB: 1. 1. AL-QAWS: the sudden and violent accidental reversion of a bow to
its unbraced State; 2. I. AL-FISAD: ‘inversion of the cupping-point’, the fault
of allowing the left elbow to curve inwards towards the path of the string
(disc'd, p. 120); on variants, etc., see Ch. 21,

1169
D. 3.  *INTISAB: act of standing to the mark (ILA L-'ALAMAH), as opposed tt
squatting, Kneeling, etc.  (See p. 102.)


IQLAB AL-QAWS: act of swivelling the bow in the hand in an anti-clockwise
direction so that the archer may draw the string from behind the neck on the
outside of his arm.

1170ISABAH: accurate shooting, accuracy.

ISHARAH: mark at which to shoot.

1171IsHTADDA: (w. ref. to shooting technique) to be tensed, be in a state of tension
(a part of the body).

IsLAH: I.I. AL-JAWZAH: act of resetting the nut of a crossbow after shooting;
2. I. AL-QAWS: adjustment of the bow by correction of distortions of the limbs.

1172IsTAWFA: 1. 1. AS-SAHM: to bring one's arrow to full draw; I. TAMAM AS-SAHM: to
bring one’s arrow to its absolute limit at full draw; 2. to come to full draw
(archer); I. BI-L-WAFA' AT-TAMAM: to attain maximum draught at full draw.

Isriva’: v.n, of ISTAWFA, q.v.

1173Istiw&’: (of the lock on the string) the state of being straight, as opposed to
oblique. (See Fig. 22a.)

I'TaMADA: 1. to aim, take aim (‘ALA at); infrequently used by T whose regular
term is NAZARA, q.¥.5 2. 1. “ALA R-RIJL: to put one's weight on the [right] foot
(in the flight shooting stance).

1174Trin: ^ act of bracing a bow. :

ITrMÁD: v.n. of I'TAMADA, q.v.

1175ITLAQ (v.n. of ATLAQA): 1. act of loosing, releasing (an arrow), the loose;
1. As-SUKÜN: the held loose, otherwise termed SAKIN, q.v. ; SALAMAT AL-I. ‘sound
quality of the loose’, i.e. a clean loose; 2. (pl. ITLAQAT): manner, way, of
shooting.

JABBADH: drawing-strap (Fig. 29).

1176JADHABA: to draw (a bow). T has a marked tendency to use this v. in contexts in
which he is not primarily concerned with shooting, but with the testing of
equipment, questions of traction, etc, (cf. JARRA & NAZA'A). See MADDA,

Jarasa (v.n. JULUs): to adopt a squatting, or half-kneeling, half-squatting,
position (jalsak), from which to shoot.

1177JaLsaH: ‘seat’, squatting or kneeling posture adopted by the archer in
addressing himself to the mark. On *J. AL-HARIB, J. AL-MUTHAQIF, J. MURABBA‘AH,
etc., sce pp. 102-3.

Jam’ (also Jami‘) (v.n. of JaMa‘A): grouping, good grouping (of arrows in a
target). (Sce p. 156.)

1178JaNwaRi(?): sce Haypari.



1179

auy amana RARE NAT AAN SE AADAL LUODON X

1180
JaRAD (coll): 1. ‘Locusts’, name of a class of darts for use with arrow-guide
and ranging from 2j in. to 73 in. in length; 2. name of an arrow-guide (from
which, presumably, the latter were shot).

JankH [Pers. charkh]: a type of crossbow fitted with a stirrup (in A! only; in
all other MSS Jarkh is replaced by gaws ar-rijl, ‘crossbow’; see
p. 19). Although the connexion with the basic meaning of the Pers. charkh,
‘wheel’, has puzzled scholars (see Huuri, Gesch., pp. 94- 95), it should be
noted that one simple method of drawing a medieval crossbow consisted in using a
straightforward pulley mechanism which entailed the use of a small wheel
(Fig. 11).

1181JanMaki (?) [Ar. adj. in -i fr. Turk. adj. çarpık (>jarbak) 'awry'?]: name ofa
form of shooting from horscback in which the archer, having the bowstring on the
inside or outside of his bow-arm, anchors in the nape of the neck. See pp. 75,
82.

JARR (v.n. of JARRA): E. act of drawing a bow, arrow, etc. 3 sec JARRA;
2. draught (MIN AS-SAHM, permitted by the arrow).

1182Jarra: to draw a bow, arrow, etc.; mainly used by T where the effort of drawing
or pulling (e.g. in bracing) or some mechanical aspect of traction is in issue
(cf. JADHABA and NAzA'A).  See Mappa.

JARRÀM: an unfletched practice arrow used by a novice (and others?).

1183Jart'AH: see Knari'AH. :

JAWALAN: (of a horse) wheeling, turning (to left or right, especially at the end
of a straight Course covered at speed as in the ).

1184JAWMARI (?): see JARMAKI. -

JawzaH: nut of a crossbow which holds the string at full draw until the release
mechanism is operated; JAWZAT AL-'AMUD: stock-nut.

1185JILA, JitA: see CHILLAH,

JINKILBAZ: see CHANGAL-I BAz.

1186*JĪTAʻAH: see KHarl'AH.

JULBAH: 1. a short tubular socket devised as a detachable nock for the shooting
of nockless arrows (p. 139 & Fig. 47); 2. a funnel-like incendiary device fitted
by its tubular end over the foreshaft of an arrow from which heated or blazing
missiles could be flung (p. 140 & Fig. 48); 3. a short length of tubing used to
protect or reinforce the string of a bow from

1187which pellets were shot by means of a tubular guide.

JULUSs: v.n. of JALASA, q.v.

1188KABBA: to press (the archer with his right index finger against ('ALA) the side
of the nock when locking).


KassAp: light practice arrow used by a novice. .

1189KARD AL-QAWS: ‘heart, centre, of the bow’, evidently, the arrow-pass. (See
Appendix 2.)

KAMINDAN, KAMINDANAH [Pers.]: bowcase (T's regular term is tirkash).

1190Kanar [Pers.]: the dividing edge separating the back of the bow from the
belly. (See Fig. 54)

KASHF? (L-)eAvAp(advbl.phr.): (w.ref.to an arrow at full draw)to the limit of
the *greater draw (on which, sce BAv&p and NIHAYAR).

1191KavvazA: to nock an arrow. E

Kàz, pl. KĀZĀT (Turk.]: nock of an arrow; synon. with fag, except where there is
need to distinguish between nockpiece and nock, in which case T clearly uses fag
for the former and K. for the latter, -

1192KHAM[Pers.]: x. raw (silk); 2. unbored (that part of the tang’s socket in thc
arrow-shaft which is not prepared prior to the fitting of the arrowhead);
3. unfinished (bow in manufacture when ready to be strung for shaping to the
desired curvature, but not yet veneered and painted).

KHANQ: act of pinching the nock of an arrow (in the fork of the index finger and
thumb when locking). (Sce Fig. 41.)

1193KHÀRIJ: sce Nazar.


ARABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY 185

1194
KHARKUMAN [Pers. khar — Ramdn?]: bracing-board.

Kuart (?): an unidentified type, or quality, of arrow. (See Ch. 5, n. 6.)

1195KHARTUM, KHURTÜM; a long horn ciip fitting over the nut of a crossbow.

KHASHAB (coll. wood^): 1. (of the bow) wooden core (as opposed to sinew backing
and horn lining); 2. (of the arrow) shaft; 3. (of the gabag, q.v.) mast.

1196KHasHIN: thick (bowsuing).

KnHaTA': 'Cathayan', a highly durable kind of bowstring made of raw, wound silk
and glue and taking its name from Cathay.

1197KHATARA: to follow through with a kkagrah, q.v.

KHATĪAH (JATI'AH; *JITA'AH, KHITA‘AH, erroneously); archer's thumbstall. (In T's
day the term was an archaism.)

1198KuaTmaH; a form of follow-through executed with a forward and downward thrust of
the bow- hand and thus characterized by limited forward rotation of the bow from
the wrist. (See Ch. 14 & Fig. 46.)

KHATT AL-ISTIWA': the horizontal planc in which the archer's fists, arms, and
shoulders are supposed to be aligned as he stands to the target.

1199Kuaqtar: claw (of a drawing-strap).

*KuiTA'AH: see KHATI‘AH.

1200Kuus(S)RAWANI: see ‘AQn 1.

KirAyaH: of three possible positions for the arrowhead at full draw, that which
lies between BIDAYAH (q.v.) affording minimum draught, and NIHAYAH (q.v.)
affording maximum

1201
draught.  KuLLAB: hook (of the claw of a drawing-strap).  *KusHTIBAN, ——- UBAN,
KUSTIBAN, —— UBAN: see KUSHTUWAN.


KUSHTUWAN, pl. KUSHTUWANAT (other forms as indicated above) (Pers. angushivan}:
1. archer’s thumb-guard (leather); sec pp. 34-35 & Fig. 17; 2. archer’s
drawing-ring (bone, horn, metal, etc.); see pp. 34-36 & Plate 7.

1202Kuzzàz: spasm of the end of the right index finger resulting from its being bent
too far around the thumb during the lock. (See p. 51.)

La'ABA (v.n. LA'R): to wag (intr. v., an arrow).

1203La'B AL-UKRAH: polo.

LAKZAH: a ‘punch’ to the rear with the right elbow at the instant of
loosing. (See p. 65.)

1204LagsHAH: name of an unidentified type of Maghrebi crossbow.

Lata’: [ow trajectory (of an arrow).

1205Làri (for LATU): 1. ‘iow’, shallow (fletchings w. ref. to their extension
outward from the shaftment); opp. ‘ALI; 2. having a low trajectory (arrows);
opp. MURTAFT.

Lavv AL-QAWS HALQAT?^: (in manufacture) process of adjusting the unfinished bow
to the desired curvature after its first bracing.

1206LavvIN: r. pliable (fletchings); 2. ‘gentle’, light (a bow); a light bow to a
male adult would not exceed 30 lb., though it could be as low as 15 Ib.; for a
boy aged 7-8 it would possibly be 10-15 lb.; 3. having a draw-weight no greater
than that to which the archer is accustomed (a bow); 4. relaxed (w, ref. to
points of relaxation, i.e. those parts of the body which the archer must not
tense when shooting).

LigAM (masc. sing.): horn lining (of the belly of the bow).

1207LUZUM: see 'AQD AL-LUZÜM.

Mapp (v.n. of MADDA): the act of drawing a loaded bow with the intention of
shooting, the draw (see MADDA); AL-M. AL-JUWWANI: the ‘internal’ draw, i.e. the
act of drawing the string closely along the inside of the left arm and then
sharply deflecting the path of the drawing hand across the face (see p. 120);
AL-M. AT-TAMAM, AL-M. AT-TAMM: the completed draw; scc also s.v. WAFA'.

1208
186 ARABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY


Mappa: to draw in the sense indicated s.v. Mapp. It is worth noting that where
the emphasis lies on drawing from the point of view of testing a bow or
considering problems of traction, T tends to use some other term such as
JADHABA, JARRA, etc. ; M. S-SAHM ZA'ID?^: to overdraw.

1209MAFRÜK: ‘twisted’, said of the loose, meaning most probably that it was
accomplished with a FARKAH, q.v. (See disc’n, pp. 66-67.) N.B.: the term does
not have the same technical sense as in Arab Archery or the Telfis (under the
form mefrith).

MAFIUL: twisted (feathers out of alignment on the shaftment of an arrow).

1210MAHBAS (? for MIHBAS): a ‘retainer’, i.e. a kind of ring worn on the ring-finger
to enable the archer to retain his reins while shooting. (Sce disc’n, p. 80)

MaHTÜT: unbraced (bow).

1211MAJID, pl. MAJIDÜN: a first-class shot, marksman (adj. qualifying RAMI,
pl. RUMAT).

*MAJMU': well grouped (arrows in a target).

1212MajRA: E. AL-M. MIN AL-IBHAM: that part of the thumb which forms the natural
support and guide along which the arrow will travel when loosed; 2, ——
(pl. MAJARI): arrow-guide, a device initially designed as a means of shooting
short arrows; in its simplest form it was a slim grooved, channel of wood as
long as a full-length arrow along which a short arrow could be drawn inside the
grip of the bow (Fig. 52; p. 148). Various kinds of guide were developed on this
basic principle (see Ch. 26). See MIjRAT.

MAKYÜL (?): said of fletchings. (See disc’n, p. 32.)

1213MANAZIL (pl): z. the three positions which the arrowhead may occupy in relation
to the grip, according to the somatic type of the archer (see pp. 123, 127 ff.);
2. the three positions on the face to which the archer—again, according to
somatic type—may draw (sec pp. 124, 127 f£).

MaQBAD: x. —— (pl. MAQABID): the handle, grip (of a bow); rarely used by T, who
prefers QABDAH, q.v.; 2. that portion of the handle which is gripped by the
little finger, ring-finger, and middle finger.

1214MARMA: a shooting range.

MASIR AS-SAHM: range attained by an arrow.

1215MASKAH; the particular manner in which an arrow is taken up, grasped, removed
from the quiver, etc., prior to nocking. N.B.: grasping in this sense is not
covered by QABDAE, which relates only to the bow.

*MasNÜ'AH: a composite bow. (See p. 10.)

1216Marn: r.the body, main portion, of the dorsal surface of the bow’s handle to
which the fingers of the bow hand do not, or should not extend (disc’d, Pp. 45);
z. the spine, or mid-line, running down the maza so defined; 3. loosely, the
back of the grip; *4. that part of an arrow which runs from below the fletchings
to the middle of the shaft.

MAWDI' AT-TAFWIQ: the nocking-point (on a bowstring).

1217MAWTÜR: having the bowstring in place (the nock of an unbraced bow). N.B.: it
does not mean ‘braced’,

MaYDÀN, pl. MAYáDIN (or colloquially, MAWADIN): a field, or ground, set aside
for military training, exercises, displays, etc.; *AL-M. AT-TAWIL: long-range
target (284-328 yds.?).  (See p. 141.)

1218MayDANi: ‘for shooting in the maydan’, adj. used to distinguish (a) the target
arrow from the war arrow, the flight arrow, etc. ; (b) the head of the target
arrow from the warhead, etc. The head appears to have been circular in
cross-section and it would have been tapered to a point. (See p. 26.) aT

MAYDANIYYAH, pl. MAYDANIYYAT: a maydani arrow; the pl. is synon. with NUSHSHAB
MAYDANi.  (See p. 28.)

1219*MEFRUK: see MAPRŪK.-

Mirtay: trigger (of a crossbow).

1220
ARADBICG-DINULISIA ULUSoANE tuy


Mijrar, pl. MAJARI: arrow-guide; to all intents and purposes synon. with MAJRA,
q.v., though it seems possible that the latter applied to the simpler forms of
guide and M. to more elaborate devices such as the M. AL-KHURTUM (‘long-nosed’
arrow-guide; Fig. 50, descr.  p- 146) or M. AR-RIKAB (stirrup-guide; Fig. sr,
descr. pp. 146-47), etc.

1221Mis (vocalization uncertain); M.(AL-) BAYAD / (AS-) SAWAD / AL-QABDAH, On the
problems pre- sented by these terms, see pp. 127-29.

MU'AKHKHAR AL-AYN: exterior angle of the eye.

1222Mv artum: synon. with USTÀD, q.v.

*Mu'AQQAB: backed, or bound, with sinew (not ‘reinforced’, Arab Archery,
 p. 10). (See p. 10.)

1223MUDTARIB: said of an arrow that flirts. See IDTARABA.

MyUHARRIF: having, or putting (oneself, one’s grip on the bow) in the oblique
position. See HARRAFA.

1224MUKHTALAS: ‘snatched’, name given to a form of loose (descr. p. 645 disc'd,
pp. 66-67).

MUKHULAH: an undefined type of crossbow.

1225MUNAHHAR (or MUNHAR?): scooped, hollowed out (side of bow's grip to provide
finger holds, piece of wood to form an arrow-guide),

MUNFASILAH (sc, gaws): ‘comprising separate elements fitted together’, almost
certainly the old Arabian composite bow; said to be synon. with WASITIYYAH, q.v.

1226MUNHARIF: oblique (stance), sideways (posture). (See p. 102.)

Munki: r. deadly, injurious; 2. effective. See ANKA.

1227MUQADDAM AL-AYN: interior angle of the eye.

MURABBA‘: I. square in cross-section (an arrowhead, such as the pyramidal);
2. applied squarely, square (grasp on the bow’s handle, as opposed to the
oblique; Fig. 44; see p. 45); 3.  *square to, directly facing, the target (a
squatting position, ja/sah; see p. 103).

1228MURABBI: 1. sitting in a cross-legged position (archer to brace a bow);
2. having, or putting (one's grasp on the bow handie) in the square position;
QABADA M.: to use the square grasp; 3. sitting, squatting, squarely to the
target.

*MURAKKABAH: composite bow.

1229MuRAYYAsH: fetched (an arrow).

MURRAN; Cornus mas (wood used in old Beduin Arab bows and said to be synon. with
shawhat).

1230MURTARY: having a high trajectory (arrow); opp. LATI.

MURTARHĪ: ‘loose, slack’, not bent to the bridle (a horse’s neck).

1231Musappar: thick in the foreshaft (sadr). N.B.: the meaning is different from
that given in Arab Archery, p. 106, where this term is rendered ‘barrelled’ and
denotes two kinds of arrow: (a) that of which the first third is thin, the
second thick, and the final third thin like the first; (b) that of which the
first half is thin and the second thick as far as the fletching. T leaves no
doubt as to the meaning it had for him (p. 24).

MUSHADDAD: t. tensed (finger on the grip); 2. pressed against (‘ALA) the bow's
grip (finger).

1232*MUSHAMMA': a piece of wax-impregnated linen applied by the Ottoman flight
shooter to the grip of his bow as an aid to his grasp. (See p. 113.)

MusiB: hitting the mark, accurate (arrow); synon. with SA'IB.

1233MusTA'AN: ‘aid’, a folded strap fitted to the end of a horsc-archer's reins to
enable him to keep them securely in his right hand (descr. p. 72; disc'd,
p. 79).

MusrTALQL: fr. istalqā ‘to throw oneself back, fall back, lie down’, this
participial adj. is used to denote a quality or characteristic required in the
limbs of a flight bow (p. 6) and could refer either to their resilience or 10
the shape of the limbs. If the latter is intended, it is difficult to determine
the exact sense. Since the limbs of a flight bow should take the greatest bend
close to the grip, they could be regarded as easily and markedly 'falling back
towards the archer at the draw.

1234
g*


auu 444*424r72 ne AGLNS NAE Ra AD AA. SO AZNAR INAM E

1235
MUSTAMIRR: Straight (flight of an arrow),

Mustawi: straight, accomplished without the use of the "twist (farkak, q.v)
(disengage- ment of the drawing hand at the loose); M. AN-NAHT: ‘straight hewn’,
having a uniform thickness from end to end (an arrow).

1236MUTA'ALLIM: apprentice (archer).

MurarraF: [done with the tip’, a faulty lock in which the index finger, instead
of being lodged on the base of the thumb-nail, is set on the tip of the thumb.

1237MUTAWAJJIH: facing squarely, directly (as opposed to turning sideways), being
in, or adopting, the frontal (as opposed to oblique) position (the archer in
addressing himself to the mark; See pp. 101-2); cf. MUWAJJIH; opp. MUHARRIF.

MUTAWASSI]: x. medium (physique); 2. intermediate (a shooting position which is
a com- promise between the frontal and oblique).

1238MUTHALLATH: triangular in cross-section (arrowhead).

MuwajypH: adopting, being in, the frontal position. The word is more usual than,
but virtually synon. with, MUTAWAJJIN, q.v.

1239Nab‘: Grewia poplifolia (not Chadara renax), name of a wood used by the Arabs
from early times for self bows.

NaBr (coll), sing. NABLAH: x. darts designed to be shot from a hand bow with the
aid of an arrow-guide; 2, crossbow bits, N.B.: unless he quotes, T does not use
the term at all to denote ordinary arrows.

1240Napas: a matched set or arrows (almost certainly not less than six, and probably
as many as twenty-four).

NarpAH: 'shake-off', a snap of the finger and thumb of the drawing hand giving a
fast, clean, loose. :

1241Nast, pl. NUSUL; arrowhead; NUSUL AL-AHDAF, Sing. NASL AL-HADAF: target heads.

NAZA'A: 4. to flex (a bow to brace it); 2. to draw (a bow to acquire or prove
one's ability to handle it, practise one's aim, etc, without actually shooting
or making shooting the primary aim (cf. JADHABA and JARRA). See Mappa,

1242Nazar (v.n. of NAZARA, Qq.V.): act of sighting, aiming; AN-N. AD-DARHIL, or MIN
DAKHIL: internal sighting, sighting from inside the bow (see NAZARA);
AN-N. AL-KHARIT, OT MIN KHARIJ : externa! sighting outside the bow (see NAZARA).

NAZARA; to sight, aim, take aim (ILA at): T’s almost exclusive use of this term
in preference to the more usual :"tamada of earlier and more conventional
authors is striking and suggests that the latter was an archaism in his day and
area; N. MIN DAKHIL AL-QAWS: to sight, aim, from inside the bow (p. 62) by
aligning the arrowhead with the mark and training one’s sight on it along the
shaft, thereby directing the line of vision from the left of the drawn string to
the right of the grip and Causing it to pass between bow and string (Fig. 24);
N. MIN KHARIf AL-QAWS: to sight, aim, from outside the bow (p. 61) by training
one’s sight on the mark along the back of the bow hand, the line of vision
thereby running from the left of the string to the left of the grip without
passing through the bow and the string (Fig.  24); N. BI-QISMAT AL-'AYNAYN: to
sight, aim, with split vision (p. 62), by training the right eye on the mark
along the shaft and the lcft along the back of the bow-hand.

1243NiHÀYAH: of three possible positions for the arrowhead at full draw, that
consistent with the maximum draught, Used absolutely, it is synon, with wari’
N., which may be conveniently translated as the ‘greater draw’ (disc’d;
pp. 127-29).

NIKAYAH: r. injury, mortal or otherwise, caused by an arrow; 2. striking power
(of bow, arrow, etc.); 3. effectiveness (of an arrow, weapon, etc.) for the
purpose intended. See ANKA.

1244Nüm: (of the eyes) line of vision. .

NusHsHá (coll, sing. NUSHSHABAH): arrows as opposed to darts and
bolts. N. TAWIL: ditto (sce TawiL, 1, and SAHM TAWIL).

1245
ARABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY 189


Qa‘ava (v.n. QUUD): synon. with JALASA, q.v.

1246Qa"ADA: to set in true (the szyaks of a bow after bracing to correct lateral
distortion).

QABADA (v.n. QABD): to grip, grasp (a bow, in the sense of arranging the fingers
and thumb around its grip, or handle, in the manner in which they are to be
disposed when shooting).

1247Qanaq [Turk, kabak ‘gourd’]: 1. principally, an elevated target, such as a gourd
or suitable substitute, affixed to the top of a mast as a mark for horse-archers
(detailed disc'n, pp. 77-78 & Appendix 6); RAMY AL-Q.: I. military exercise in
which horse-archers shot at the kind of target indicated; 2. the act, technique,
of shooting upwards (from horseback as in the exercise); opp. QIGHAJ, q.v.

QaBDAH: 1, —— (pl. QABADAT, QIBAD): grasp, mode of gripping a bow: see QABADA;
2. bow- hand; 3. fist of either hand; 4. muscle under tension in the forearm;
5. linear measure of about 33 in.; 6. —— (pl. QIBAD): grip, handle of a bow. Sec
also MaQsAp.

1248*QaFALA: to lock, put a lock on (the bowstring (‘ALA L-WATR) for the purpose of
drawing it).  See 'AQADA, 4 and p. 54.

*QarLAH: lock (of the drawing hand on the bowstring). See pp. 40-41, $4.

1249QALAB, QALIB: 1. shape, contour (of an arrow shaft); Q. ASH-SHA'IRAH: the barley
grain line (of arrow in which the shaft is thicker in the middle than at the
ends (Fig. 14) ); Q. ASH-SHAM AH: the candle-form (of arrow in which the shaft
tapers from the head to the base of the nock (Fig. r4) ); the latter is said to
be MUSADDAR, Q.V.; 2. a former (for pressing a bow into shape).

QALAM: ‘Pen’, I. name of a type of crossbow bolt; 2. name of a type of
arrow-guide (used, presumably, to shoot the latter, or so named because of its
shape; see pp. 149-50).

1250QanQAL (most frequently pointed QIRQIL): brigandine.

QasiR: short (arrows); explanation s.v. SAHM; TAQSIR AL-Q.: sce "T'AQsIR; TATWIL
AL-Q.: see TATWIL.

1251Qaws, pl. QISTYY, also AQWAS: bow; Q. AL-JARKH: see JARKH; Q. AR-RIJL: crossbow
(see p. 18); Q. AS-SABQ, Q. AS-SIBAQ: flight bow; Q. AL-YAD: band bow (used in
cases where it is necessary to differentiate between the ordinary bow and the
crossbow). See also s.v. FHJAZIYYAH, MASNÜ'AH, MUNFASILAH, MURAKKABAH,
WASITIYYAH.

QicHaJ, Qiqay [Turk. Aag ‘slope’]: inter alia (detailed disen, pp. 78-79 &
Appendix 6) RAMY AL-Q. denotes: X. a military exercise in which horse-archers
shot at a butt or other ground target along a line of flight parallel to the
left thigh; 2. the act, technique, of shooting downwards at any angle.

1252QinAT: linear measure of about 1-1 in. (See Appendix 1.)

QIvAM: stance, standing position from which to shoot (as opposed to JULDs,
Qu'UD, q.v); Q. RIJL AL-QAWS: a fault in a bow whercin the strength of the lower
limb is greater than that of the upper (disc'd, p. 121).

1253Quepap (sing. QABID2): fingers of the bow-hand with which the handle of the bow
is gripped (in T the little finger, ring-finger, and middle finger).

Qu'üb: v.n. of QA'ADA, Q.v.

1254RapiF: sce ‘AQp.

Rar‘: (in manufacture) process of reffexing the rudimentary bow consisting of
the wooden core and horn lining. (See pp. 8, 13.)

1255RAHAH: centre of the palm (kaf).

RAJAHA: to be rigid, inflexible (the handle, grip, of a bow).

1256*Ràjp': (intr.) recovering, having recovered (a bow in its unbraced form or
 reverting thereto).

Rama (v.n. Ramy): 10 shoot ('ALA, “AN QAWS, a bow).

1257RAMI,pl. RUMAT: archer.

Ramy: shooting, archery (often R. BI-N-NUSHSHAB); R. AL-AHDAF: target shooting;
R. AS-SABQ, R. AS-SIBAQ: flight shooting. Sce also s.v. QazaQ, QicHay.

1258
190 ARABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY


RAMYAH: a shot.

1259Raqip: held in a horizontal position (a bow); opp. WAQIF.

RaQliQ: tapered to a point (arrowhead).

1260RaQgaga: to bring to a point, taper (an arrowhead),

Ra’s: r. tip, point (of an arrowhead); 2. head (of a bolt).

1261RasHQ: a bout of arrows (in target shooting an agreed number of arrows shot by
each com- petitor before recovery for shooting a second, or more, times).

Raji: a weight, in Syria of T's day, of 4:07 lb. (1850 grams). For other
standards, see Appendix r.

1262RavvAsHA: to fletch (an arrow).

Rygr: lower limb (of a bow). For synonyms, see s.v. BAYT, DUSTAR.

1263*RIKAB: used absolutely for QAws AR-R. See Pp. I9, 29, 88

RIMAYAH: R. BI-S-SIHAM: archery (for which the usual term in the Ghunyah is
RAMY, q.v.).

1264Ris, (coll) pl, RisHAt: fletchings.

RujU' (also RAH): recovery (of a bow); saRI' AR-R: having speed of recovery (a
bow).

1265RUTUBAH: suppleness (in a bow).

SABBABAH: the /eft index finger (almost invariably in the Ghunyah, quotations
excepted).

1266SABAQA; to engage in flight shooting. See SrBAQ and Ch. 20 for details,

SABQ (v.n. of saBAQA): flight shooting; synon., for all practical purposes, with
SIBĀQ, q.v.  hence QISIYY AS-S.: bows for flight shooting, flight bows, etc.

1267SABQIYYAH, pl. SABQIYYAT: flight arrow. See detailed study, pp. 105-10.

SADR: foreshaft (of an arrow). N.B.: nor the part from the shaftment to the
middle of the shaft as in Arab Archery, p. 103.

1268SAFIHAH, pl. SAFA'TH: lamina (of a brigandine).

SAHM: I. (pl. SIHAM): arrow; S. TAMAM: a full-length arrow (30 in, in the case
of the maydani and slighty less than 29 in. in the case of the war arrow);
s. TAWIL: ‘long arrow’, arrow designed for normal use with a standard hand bow
and so called where there is need to distinguish from s. QasiR, ‘short arrow’,
i.e. any arrow or similar missile such as a dart or bolt designed to be drawn
and shot from inside the grip by means of an arrow-guide; S. AL-MÜS: razor arrow
(so called from a razor edge concealed in the nock (Fig. 47; descr.  p. 138,
disc'd, p. 142); s. AS-SIBAQ: flight arrow (synon. with sagQrvvau). 2. *shaft
(of a bolt); 3. lathe, prod (?; of a crossbow). (See Ch. 4, n. 8.)

1269SA'IB, pl. sawa’IB: an arrow that hits the mark, marksman’s arrow, accurate
shot.

Sap: side of a stirrup.

1270SAKANA (intr. v.): to hold (by pausing at the draw immediately prior to
loosing). See SAKIN, 2.

SAKHKHANA: to apply heat treatment (to a bow). See TasKHIN.

1271SAKIN: r. immobile, still (w. ref. to points of stillness, i.e. those parts of
the body which the archer must keep absolutely motionless when shooting);
2. held (describing a form of loose in which the archer pauses, or holds, at
full draw before releasing; descr. p. 64; disc'd, p. 66).

SAKKANA (tr. v.): to hold (synon., for all practical purposes, with SAKANA,
q.v.).

1272SALAMAH: I.S. AL-ITLAQ: ‘soundness of the loose’, i.e. a clean loose 42.5,
AL-QAWS: ‘soundness of the bow’, i.e. the absence of any danger of its springing
violently back into its reflexed position (on which, see INQILAg).

SALAS; S. AL-JADHB: ‘smoothness of drawing’, that quality in a bow which affords
the user a smooth draw.

1273SaLiB: heavy (w. ref. to draw weight, a bow); opp. LAYYIN.

SARI: s. AR-RUJŪ‘: see RAJA'A; S. AT-TARJÍH: see Tarjin. ,

1274Saf’: (ofa bowstring) the act of lashing (a part of the body, as a result of
faulty shooting technique).



1275

ARABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY I91

1276
SAWAD: x. black discoloration, severe bruise (caused by injury arising from
faulty shooung technique); 2. beard (?) in the expression MISAH“ SAWAD (see
p. 128).

Sawa: the act of galloping, charging (a horse).

1277SAYSARAH (or SISARAH?) [Pers.?]: in the contexts in which it occurs s. seems to
indicate some kind of protective covering; hence we suggest: 1. protective
covering, probably of leather (see p. 94), to safeguard the loop of the
bowstring against chafe at the point where the loop fits into the bow’s nock
(p. 20); we know of such a covering on a Persian (eighteenth- century?)
bowstring; 2. the lip of a leather thumb-guard protecting the pad of the thumb
(p. 34).

SHADDA: I.to tense (parts of the body); 2. to apply, exert, pressure (to, on
(‘ALA) part of a bow, arrow, etc.).

1278SHADDADA: to tense (parts of the body).

Suapip: 1. powerful, heavy (a bow); opp. LAYYIN; 2. tensed (w, ref. to points of
tension, i.e.  thosc parts of the body which the archer must tense when
shooting); opp. LAYYIN.

1279SmaHADAH: the right index finger.

SHAH MYRAT: ‘King-Guide’, name of an elaborate type of arrow-guide (Fig. 49;
detailed disc'n, pp. 150-51).

1280SuAIRAH: see QALAB.

SHAM'AH: see QALAB.

1281SHAQQ: X. —— (pl. sHUQUQ): splitting, split (of skin or nails as a result of
injury caused by faulty shooting technique); 2. slot (in a cylindrical
arrow-guide; see p. 145).

*SuARIJ: a self bow consisting of a single split lengthwise, (See p. 10.)

1282SHARRABAH: tassel (fitted to an arrow-guide, a JULBAH, q.V., OF similar aid, to
prevent it from falling out of the hand at the loose).

SHAWHAT: a wood said to be the same as Cornus mas.

1283SHIBR: span, linear measure of—in our view—-about 73 in. (See p. 29.)

SiBAq (v.n. of SABAQA): flight shooting (in which archers compete for distance);
used either absolutely or in the full expression RAMY A$-5, “ALA BU'D
AL-MASAFAH. S. and SARQ arc, for most purposes, synonymous. Inherent in the root
SBQ is the notion of getting ahead, and, in the sphere of archery, it has
reference not to speed, as in racing (also s.), but to distance.  Strictly
speaking, s. differs from saBQ in that the latter means purely and simply
‘getting in front of’, while s. brings out the competitive element, ‘competing
with another/others in an attempt to outdistance him/them", or the like. See
Ch. 19 for full explanation of flight shooting.

1284SIHHAT AL-'AMAL: faultless technique Gn shooting).

SILAN (consistently pointed as SAYALAN, probably as a pseudo-correction): tang
of an arrow- head.

1285*Srper [Pers.]: ‘shield’, a grooved horn shelf, or guide, strapped to the hand
of an Ottoman flight shooter, to enable him safely to bring his arrow well
inside the grip. (See p. 106.)

Sreirsar (Pers. sar afsdr, *head-stall']: martingale (disc'd, p. 79)- í

1286SISARAH: see SAYSARAH. ;

SIYAH, pl. SIYĀT (consistently pointed as SIYYAH, -At): (of the limb of a bow)
the relatively inflexible extremity which serves as a lever during the draw
(Fig. 7; pp. xxviii-ix); AS-5.  AL-'ULYÀ, S. AL-YAD: the upper siyah, that of
the upper limb; AS-S. AS-SUFLA, S. AR-RITL: the lower siyah, that of the lower
limb.

1287SUKÜN (v.n. of SAKANA): r. the act of holding (see SAKIN, 2); ITLAQ as-S.: the
held loose (see SAKIN, 2); 2. state of stillness (in parts of the body; see
SAKIN, 1). i

Su'Üp as-SAHM: the angle of ascent of an arrow.

1288*Tappip: bad grouping (of arrows in a target); Opp. JAM".

TapMik: (of an arrow leaving the bow at the loose) the act of slapping the
arrow-pass (DIMAK) with consequent deflection.

1289
192 ARABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY


TarwiQ: the act of nocking an arrow; MAWDI' AT-T.: the nocking-point (on the
bowstring).

1290TAHARRAKA: to gad, fly erratically (an arrow).

TAHLIL: v.n. of HALLALA, q.v.

1291TaHRir: 1. v.n. of HARRAFA, q.v.; 2. (used absolutely w. ref. to the way in
which the archer addresses himself to the target) the sideways, or oblique,
position, c.g. QU'UD AT-T, the act of squatting in the oblique position. (See
p. 122 and Fig. 42 (stancc).)

TALQ (v.n. of TALAQA): synon. with ITLAQ, q.v., the latter representing,
presumably, strict literary usage and the former the colloquial.

1292TAMAM: see Sau.

TAMTIT: the act, process of stretching (the bowstring in the last stage of its
manufacture so as to prevent stretch on the braced bow).

1293TANQIL: act of cantering (a horse).

‘TAgaT (pl): (?) thar portion of the bow which consists of ‘layers’ (of sinew,
horn, etc.), i.e.  ail but the siyahs.

1294Tags: yew.

TAQŞĪR aL-Qasir: ‘shortening the short’, (w. ref. to the lock, p. 53) slight
retraction, from the recommended normal position, of the distal phalanx of the
thumb as it rests beneath the index finger; cf. Tagsir AT-TAWIL which is
illustrated in Fig. 21e.

1295TaQsIR AT-TAWIL: ‘shortening the long’ r. (w. ref. to the lock, p. 53) slight
retraction, from the recommended normal position, of the index finger as it
rests on the distal phalanx of the thumb (see Fig. 21, comparing (e) with (a) );
2. (w. ref. to the bow-hand, p. 123) slight retraction of the fingers to allow
the archer to grasp squarely as he would certainly Wish to if, for instance, the
Brip of a bow were too thin for his normal grasp.

TARAF AZ-ZIND: see ZIND.

1296TARAJJAHA: to outclass (ALA; a competitor in shooting).

TARAKKABA: to be composite (a bow), be composed of (MIN).

1297'TARBI: opp. of TAHRIF, q.V., and, w. ref. to the way in which the archer
addresses himself to the target, synon, with TAWJIH, q.v., though much less
common.

*Tampir: synon, with RADIF in the phr. 'AQD AR-RaDIF. See ‘Agp.

1298TARID LI-S-SAHM: giving, resulting in, good cast (use of a particular technique,
item of equipment, etc.).

TARJĪH (v.n. of RAJJAHA, to cause to outweigh); SARI'AT-T., said of a bow, means
that it has speed of recovery, i.e. it is quick (sari) to make its limbs
‘outweigh’, or overcome, the pull exerted during the draw and, by springing
forward in the direction of their natural pull, regain the position they had
before the braced bow was drawn.

1299TAR (v.n. of TARAQA): (w. ref. to the action of the bowstring) rapping (of
fingers, etc. as a result of faulty technique).

TaskHIN: the application of heat treatment (to a tow). Full details, pp. 99-100.

1300Tasma [Pers. tdsmah]: leather band (on bowstring to protect the nocking point?
Sec p. 140).

Taswis (?) AS-SAHM: the act of causing an arrow to fly too low (?). See detailed
disc’n, p. 120.

1301TaTRIF: (w. ref. to the lock) the act of putting only the tip of the right index
finger on the distal phalanx of the thumb (sce MuvTAnRAF). This action amounts
to excessive ‘shortening of the long’ (see TAQSIR AT-TAWIL). —

TATWIL AL-QaSIR: "lengthening the short, r. (w. ref. to the lock, p. 53) slight
projection, beyond the normal recommended position, of the thumb as it rests
beneath the index finger (cf. TAQSIR AL-QasIR and TAQsIR AT-TAWIL);
2. (w. ref. to the bow hand, p. 123) slight exten- sion of the fingers to allow
the archer to use the oblique grasp; opp. TAQSIR AT-TAWIL, q.v.

1302TaTWIL AT-TAwiE: ‘lengthening the long’, (w. ref. to the lock, p. 53) slight
projection, beyond the normal recommended position, of the index finger as ít
rests on the thumb with the result that the middle phalanx of the finger lies
wholly on the thumb-nail.


ARABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY 193

1303
Tatwiz: (in manufacture) the process of veneering the bow with raz [Pers.], or
bark, prior to finishing with paint.

TAWAJJAHA: to face (ILA towards, the mark) squarely, directly (as opposed to
adopting the sideways position). (See p. 102.)

1304TAWAJJUH (v.n. of TAWAJJAHA); the frontal, directly facing (as opposed to
sideways), position (see p. 102); synon. with Tawyist and, morc rarely, TARBÍ'.

Tawit: used absolutely to denote 1. long arrow(s) (see SAHM); 2. bow for
shooting the latter; 3. the index finger of the drawing hand (see TagsiR);
4. the fingers of the bow-hand (see "'TAQSIR AT-T.).

1305TawjiH (v.n. of WAJJAHA): the frontal position (adopted by the archer in
addressing himself to the target); used absolutely; synon. with TAWAJJUH, Q.V.

Tawof' (?) AL-LIHAM: (in manufacture of the bow) an expression which, on the
basis cf context, etc., would appear to denote the process of fitting (in sense
of shaping and adjusting) the horn lining (lihdm) to the wooden core with which
it is to be bonded to form the belly of the finished weapon. It would be
attractive to read targ , ‘grafting’, for cawgi’ of the MSS, but we see
technical objections. Likdm admits of no doubt; it occurs in many works with the
sense indicated.

1306*TAzLiQ: act of following through by causing or allowing the bow-hand to go
forward in a smooth gliding movement.

Taznip: distressing contusion of the wrist (?) or, the fault of striking the
wrist. (See Ch. 20, n. 5.)

1307THABATA: to settle to the string (‘ALA L-WATR; bow after bracing).

THABIT: settled (bow to the string).

1308TIRKAsH [Pers.]: quiver, bowcase.

ULKI [Turk. iii, ‘target’]: *a target at long range (130-150 arm-spans). In our
Ghunyah the term is qualified in the expression AL-U. AL-QASIR which we take on
empirical grounds to be a short-range target in the order of 75-80 yds. (See
disc’n, p. 141.)

1309‘Una, pl. a‘NAQ: (of the bow's limb) the ‘neck’, that point at the end of the
working limb where the siyah (q.v.) begins, or, in other words, the root of the
siyah. (See Fig. 5.)

*UqpAH, pl.'UQAD: 1. (of the finger) phalanx (nor joint, mifsal);
 2. protuberance, meaning, in

1310_ the expression ‘U. AL-ASABI’, the knuckles.

ÜorvvaH: a weight of 3z of a RATL, q.v.

1311*Unwau: loop (of a bowstring).

Usráp, pl. UsSTApUN: a master (archer, bowyer, in the hierarchy of professional
organization ; see pp. 123, 155).

1312Ward’: r. the completed draw; W. BAYAD and w. NIHAYAH: the greater draw,
i.c. the longest possible; w. B12 YAH (defined as AWWAL w.): the ‘lesser draw’,
i.e, the shortest possible (full details, pp. 127 ff.); 2. (of an arrow) the
draught at full draw; W. TAMM/TAMAM: maximum attainable draught; 3. (of an
archer) thc length of reach at full draw.

Wayx: the belly (of a bow or its grip}; synon. W. BATN, q.V.5 OPP- ZAHR.

1313Waotr: held in a vertical position (a bow); opp. RAQID.

NVASITIYYAH (not "from Wasit’): the intermediate bow—probably so called from the
point of view of construction and relative proportions which we take to be the
old Arabian com- posite (see p. 10); said to be synon. with MUNFASILAH.

1314WATR, pl. AWTAR: bowstring; W. AS-SIBAQ: string for use with a fiight bow.

WAZANA: I. to determine the draw weight (of a bow held ix position by a peg,
weights being attached to its string); 2. to find the centre of gravity (of an
arrow); 3. to gauge elevation and direction (when aiming).

1315WWAZANA: to balance (an arrow ro find its centre of gravity).

WAZN: vn. of WAZANA, 3.

1316
194 ARABIC-ENGLISH GLOSSARY


WAZN, pl. AWZAN: X, weight (of arrows, in usual sense of mass); 2, thc centre of
gravity (of an arrow); 3. v.n. of WAZANA 3.

1317YAD: =z. (of the body) arm (as opposed to hand, kajf); 2. the upper limb (of a
bow). For synonyms, scc BAYT,

YAGHLIQ [Turk. ? yağı, ‘enemy’ + -lik?]: war arrow (details, PP- 25, 28 &
Appendix 2).

1318Y&MUR: ibex horn,

Yasr (Pers.]: type of arrow with a sharp head, possibly a broadhead.

1319ZAHR, pl. ZUHÜR: 1, (of a bow) the back, i.e. its convex surface when braced;
2. (of a feather) the dorsal side, i.e. its outer surface; 3. (of the dorsal
surface of the bow's grip) the spine, i e.  the longitudinal line dividing the
surface.

ZANBURAK [Pers. ‘little wasp’]: undefined type of crossbow. Sec pp. 8, 19.

1320ZAQQ: creep, or nosing forward of an arrow at full draw.

ZARADAH: metal link (bound into the bowstring for the purpose of shooting
nockless arrows),

1321ZINAH: V.Đ. of WAZANA, I.

ZiND: the meaning normally given in the Arabic dictionaries is ‘wrist’, but the
anatomical area to which z. is applied is much wider, it seems, than that
covered by the Engl. term, for references in ihc text show that it extends from
the carpal end of the radius (ALA Z-2.)  across the wrist-joint (ASL AZ-z.)
right down to the heel of the hand (TARAF AZ-Z.) Very often used absolutely to
denote the latter, it is apt to mislead.

1322ZURQAH: light bruise, blueness, caused by bruising.


NOTES AND REFERENCES

1323
MANUSCRIPTS


In the introduction we have described the British Museum codex on which this
work is based and, in general terms, defined and discussed the various groups of
MSS used to control, correct, or otherwise improve the text and add to our
knowledge of its subject matter. Restricting ourselves to bare essentials, we
now give particulars about individual MSS, the groups into which we have placed
them, and the meaning of the symbols by which we refer to them.  Further
information about them can be found ín sources indicated in parentheses
following the indication of date, and, in the case of the Istanbul MSS, the
reader should consult Ritter, Zs/., XVIII, 1929, pp. 137 ff.

1324Before proceeding to details we draw special attention to the following point:
in the case of groups A, C, and D, the unqualified usc of the letter assigned to
the group indicates that it denotes all MSS within thar group. Its meaning in
the case of the B group will be explaincd when we come to it.


A Al: British Museum, Add, 23489. No date, but probably early fifteenth century,
if not end of fourteenth, (Catalogus codicum manuscriptorum orientalium
. . . Pars secunda..., Londini, 1846 (-1871), pp. 667-68. Fox descriptions,

1325
etc., see also above, pp. xxxv-vi.)

At: Cambridge University Library. MS Qq.240 (7). Date: 886/1481. (E. G. Browne,
A Hand-List of the Muhammadan Manuscripts, etc., Cambridge, 1900, p. 127.) This
is a badly written and defective copy, apparently transcribed from the same
source as At and frequently more word-perfect, but containing more or less the
same lacunae as their common source. It becomes very defective towards the end.

1326
a o: Istanbul, Aya Sofya, 2902 mük, [=i]. Date: 802/1400, (Ritter, op. Cit.,
p. 139. See also above, p. xxxvii.)  B To save space we quote only the two main
representatives of this group (see B, below) unless there is complete unanimity
in all MSS or unless there is some special reason for doing otherwise
(e.g. because B! is at variance with B7). It should be noted that, unlike A, C,
and D, B does not denote all MSS of the group, This is either so termed er,
where appropriate, indicated by Bb. The following expedients are adopted:


B denotes B'B* b s bibib?b! (abbr. b!)

1327
Bt: Istanbul, Aya Sofya, 4193. Date: 795/1393. (Ritter, op. cit., p. 138.)
Described as a commentary on the poem Ghunyat al-Murámi, it is attributed to a
Shaykh Ibn Abi Hajalah. It may well be that this is the name of the


person who corrected and revised Taybugha’s text.  B: Paris, Bibliotheque
Nationale, Arabe 6,160, Date: 799/1397. (G. Vajda, Index général des manuscrits
arabes, etc., Paris, 1953. P- $77.) Not, in general, as accurate as B!, There
are two paginations; that executed in

1328
occidental numerals is followed.  bt: Istanbul, Aya Sofya, 4320. Date:
864/1459-60. (Ritter, op. cit., p. 138.) Our microfilm copy which comes to an


abrupt end at folio 6oa is apparently incomplete, but on this point we can
supply no further information, b:: Istanbul, Aya Sofya, 3800. No date, but
probably fifteenth century. (Ritter, op. cit., p. 137.)  b*: Cambridge
University Library, MS Qa. 173(8). Date: 1174/1759-$0. (Browne, op. cic,
p. 127.) Has close

1329
affinities with b’.  bt: Istanbul, Aya Sofya, 4198 (from folio 89b). Date:
873/1469. (Ritter, op. cit, p. 138.) Close affinities with Bê,


b b: Leiden, Bibliotheek der Riiksuniversiteit, Cod. Or. 74. No date, but
probably post-sixteenth century. (Catalogus Codicum Orientalium, etc,, III,
Lugd.-Bat., 1865.)  C C!: Istanbul, Topkapı Sarayı Müzesi Kütüphanesi,
HI. Ahmet: 2603. Date: 805/1493, (Ritter, op. cit., p. 139, under Seraib. 2608.)

1330
195


196 NOTES AND REFERENCES

1331
C?: British Museum, Or. 1358. No date, but probably post-sixtcenth
century. (C. Rieu, Supplement to the Catalogue of Arabic Manuscripts, London,
1894, p. 557.)  C*: Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, Arabe 2,833. No date, but
probably post-sixteenth century. (Vajda, op. cit., p.  454-) D


D?: Istanbul, Aya Sofya, 3314. No dare, bur probably fifteenth or sixteenth
century. (Ritter, op. cit., p. 140.)  D7: Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS
Huntington 208. No date, but probably post-sixteenth century. (J. Uri, Biblo-
thecae Bodleianae Codicum Manuscriptorum Orientalium . . . Pars Prima, Oxonii,
1787, p. 103.)

1332
THE DOXOLOGY 2b-3a


Cf, A*, 1a-2b; a, rb-22; B!, rb-2a; B?, 4b-52; b!, rb; b", 1b-2b; bì, 1b-2a; b*,
89b; 5, lacking.  1. This invocation as it stands is peculiar to A? and is
probably the scribe's.

13332. At, et al, supplying a lacuna caused by a hole in A!, fo. 2.

3. Vocalizing as yusta'là bili alwiyar* l-Itlàm wa-yustawlà (A, et al).

13344. Al-bádi'ah (Aa), B: al-jàmi'ah.

5. Reading al-'itrah (B) for ai-'ithrah.

1335
CHAPTER 1 3a-10b


Cf. A*, 2b-12b; a, 2a-9b; B!, 237b; B*, a-10a; bi, rb-5b; b*, 2b-r1b; b, 2a-5b;
bf, 89b-932; b, rb-4a. In the various MSS there are textual differences which
cannot be discussed here.

13361. For the Muslim, archery, like all human activity, must be motivated by
religion. Hence, in order to serve the ends of his Islamic conscience a
religious case is shaped in support of word and deed. Material similar to, and
in some cases identical with, that presented by our author is to be found in
other treatises, Cf., for example, Arab A PP. 3-9, 24-25; Hein, Isl, XIV, 1925,
pp. 294, 300, 303, 312-13, 317, 319-29. Cf. Klopsteg, pp. 12-13 I14-16.

2. We omit severa! lines of unimportant subject matter. At this point in A? a
lacuna begins, which ends only at what in A‘ is v. 23 of the poem.

1337
CHAPTER 2 192-202


Cf. A*, 23a-243; a, 11b-r2a; B!, rsb-16a; B7, 17a, 14b (folios disarranged); b!,
10a-r1a; b*, 24a-25b; b*, gb- rob; bi, 9075-982; b, 7b-8b.  1. These five points
are not expressly stated, but implied in the verse with which the commentary is
opened in our text. As in A'a, the opening is abrupt. In all other MSS the
commentary is more smoothly introduced with subject matter of a little more
genera! nature.

1338
CHAPTER 3 20a-25b


Cf, A*, 24a-31b; a, 12a-17a; B!, 16b-20b; B*, 14b-15b, 172-202 (folios
disarranged); b!, 11a-13b; b!, 25b-31b; b3, rcb- 12b; b*, 98a-100a; b, 8b-11a,

13391. C£. Mukhassas, VL, p, 38.

2. Conjectural translation of ragàt (‘layers, strands") whose meaning in this
context is not entirely clear. It may mean the laminated section of the bow
which lies betwecn the two siyahs, consisting of the two dustdrs (see Glossary)
and the grip.

13403. Cf. Arab Archery, p. 13,

4. Sec ibid., p. 83, n. 35. Faris and Elmer take the significance of ‘power’
(questeah) and ‘strength’ (shiddah) to be,

1341respectively, length of cast and force of impact, but from Taybugha’s
introduction (p. 3) it would scem that if

there is in fact any difference in meaning, it is that quwwah relates to the
potential of the bow proper and shiddak to that of the bowstring. If this is the
case, he is not always consistent in his use of the terms.  . According to CD
(e.g. C?, 38a; D4, 45b), gluing and binding were winter processes, reflexing
being carried out in the spring. Climatic differences probably account for the
discrepancy.  . Cf. CD.  B. ‘ The flight bow, being more delicate than the war
bow, needs special care when flexed for bracing. Both limbs must be bent equally
and together. This point is not mentioned in Ch. 17 (on bracing).  Some
information on Oriental crossbows and arbalests may be derived from Reinaud, 74,
1848, pp. 211-18; E{uuri, Gesch., and Cahen, BEO, XII, pp. 129-34 and
pp. 151-54.

1342
EE wm


*

1343
NOTES AND REFERENCES 197


ro. According to D, the hand bow is preferable because it has the support of
Prophetic tradition, combines lightness with rapid shooting and effectiveness,
and is the weapon of kings. The crossbow, on the other hand, is simpler to use
and is more serviceable in fortresses and in ships, where it can stand up to the
damp salt air—presurnably if constructed as indicated in our text.

1344ir. Reading dina haylihi, not dina hilah, both of which are contemplated by our
scribe (A!, 252, line 5).


CHAPTER 4 25b-294 Cf. At, 31b-36b; a, 17a-202; BY, 200-242; B*, 208-224; b',
13b-155; b?, 31b- 36a; b*, 12b-14b; bt, rooa—roib; b, Lra-13a.  On bowstrings,
see also Hein, Isl., XV, pp. 1-8, Kiopsteg, pp. 54-59; and Arab Archery,
pp. 94-102.  1. The reading of a, supplying, in our view, a lacuna in A which in
the absence of this one word reads ‘it is called “the Persian” ", In other MSS
chillah is either spclied differently (e.g. B'bt*: jila} or has been corrupted.
2. From the text it is not clear whether glue was used in the Persian string. It
is certainly not mentioned, and in a there i$ no mention of glue in connexion
with either string. Cathayan string is there said to be ‘made of raw, wound silk
with a little wax’ (x72). This reading, however, is exceptional. Some form of
binding agent would certainly be needed, be it glue or wax, or, a5 in the case
of Ottoman and Sino-Tatar strings, thread or twine bound around the strands,
otherwise the string would become inextricably tangled when removed from the
bow.  3. ‘A thin string is better for the flight bow because it increases
cast... but it requires mastery of shooting, for unless the loose is clean, the
arrow will flirt and lose range’ (Klopsteg, p. 55. Cf. Hein, 4:3., XV, p. 3).
4. Reading yusadda (B) for yushadda (A*, 26b, line 6).  s. According to C, the
raps were held in a container of some kind or other and hung from the string by
a hook.  Before each extra ratí was added the hook and container were removed.
6. Ct. D.  7. Tbe material is given in aC as hemp (cf. D) ot linen.  $. Reading
twa-s-sahm khums al-watr (aB) for wa-s-sahm khams bi-I-tatr (A), 27b, line 2),
The A text is cleariy corrupt and should be restored by reference to a. ‘Arrow’
as a translation of sahm is here technically inappropriate.  The word can mean
‘stave’ and in this context it must denote what is nowadays termed the ‘prod’,
i.e, the stave or lathe which constitutes the actual bow as opposed to the stock
Camüd).  9. In B, et al., *oa-s-salm , . . al-roatr’ is not immediately followed
by a description of the method determining the lenath of the crossbow string,
which is deferred until the end of the chapter and is phrased somewhat
differently: ‘The way to determine the length of the string for a jarkh and
similar weapons is to ascertain first the length of the bow from nock to nock
. . . and then to fx twa pegs into a wall, putting a distance equivalent to five
times the length of the bow between the two. You next twist the resulting string
lengthwise in the appropriate manncr into four strands and knot the two loops at
each end,’ Cf. a, 18b.  ro. Reading asaddu (or, perhaps, ahdā) for asda (A},
27b, line 8) and ashda (A*) and various other corrupt readings

1345in other MSS.  t1. B.  12. B.  13. The text of At (29a, lines 5-6) is corrupt by
reason of a lacuna. The sense, however, can be restored by reference

to B, et al.

1346CHAPTER § 29a-36a Cf. A, 36b-45b; a, 204-254; Bt, 249-296; B?, 222-263; b!,
rsb-19a; b*, 362-435; bt, r4b-17b; b*, ro1b-104b; b, 132-162. i On Turkish
arrows, see Hein, Isi., XV, pp. 26-53; and Kiopsteg, pp. 74-85 and index. In
making comparisons it

should be borne in mind that Mustafa Kani is primarily concerned with flight
shooting, in which requirements are different from those imposed by other kinds
of shooting. Useful information may also be derived from Arab Archery,
pp. 103-16 and index under ‘arrows’, ‘feathers’, etc.

1347ri. Reading an-nushshab (B) for the corrupt as-sryat {A}, 292, last line).


2. C.

13483. Reading naslihi (A, a, et al.) for aglihi (A1, 295, line 3).

4. B.

1349s. CD,

6. The reading khart is uncertain. Even if correct, it is of doubtful
meaning. Taking into account the meanings

1350of the Arabic root kh r t and its derivatives, we suggest that it means either
conical arrows tapering from fletchings

to head or arrows having the required length, but not breadth.

1351D.

. The same story with less detail is told in Arab Archery, p. 101.

13529. The meaning of haydari is not explained in any source known to us. jt is
clearty an adjective from haydar, onc meaning of which is ion’, It may therefore
designate a type of hunting head, in which case it may have been a broadhead,
which is most suitable for this purpose. As Taybugha is interested essentially
in military archery, it is understandable that he should dismiss such a head as
inferior. Jaydar, apart from being a proper name CAL, the son-in-law of the
Prophet, was so called) may mean: (a) short, smal! made; (b) hard. We should
not, on the


gea

1353
198 NOTES AND REFERENCES


other hand, exclude the possibitity of textual corruption. Could it be that-we
have to do with junmari from Pers, Jánvar -<i Ar. adjectival -i ‘pertaining to
animals’? In the Arabic script the word could casily be mistaken for the more
familiar fay.t ri,

1354IO. According w C. the heads of butt arrows (amàfiyyát) were square ("ala
t-tarbi*), the interpretation of which is uncertain. We suggest that bluntness
is implied,

Ir. On the gargal, see Mayer, Mamluk Costume, p. 40. On the laminae (safa’th),
see ibid., p. 37, n. 8.

1355I2. According to CD, it is the tang, and not the head, to which Taybugha refers
here. Our text makes sound, clear Sense as it stands, however. What is meant is
that the complete head—which includes the tang—imust be cvenly balanced about
its longitudinal axis.

13. D.

135614. For details of the operation, see Arab Archery, p. 109.

I5. D. Herea long head is recommended for armour-piercing purposes. It should
not, however, be too long as it wil!  then be weak, It is added that the shorter
the arrowhead, the more firmly it will sit in the arrow, especially if it has a
long tang.

135716. In CD there is a warning against allowing the head to absorb too much water
when tempering. Over-quenching

could in fact make the steel brittle.

1358The reading of A! (32a, line 6) is at-ta'álig ash-shVf (V2y. None of our MSS
offers a reading that is really

intelligible to us, We conjecture ta‘dlig (or, less probably, ta‘alif) a5-5uft
(or, as-sift) ‘appendages (or, "encasings")

1359of the shoulder (or, “upper part"y.

18, In C it is stated that it should not exceed one Syrian ügiyyakh (543'0z.) in
weight. This is too heavy for practical purposes,

1360I9. The reading of At, 32b, line 7, is al-makvül wa-huwa l-ak:äf. The reading of
5, 14b, viz. al-makildt wa-huwa Laktuff, suggests that we should read al-makyül
wa-huwa I-akuff, which is virtually what we find in B, 24a, The problem is
discussed in detail on p- 32.

20. Nor in this context synonymous with asra'. The reference is to flight
shooting (sibág) where the aim is to outstrip 2 competitor in point of distance,

13612r. Reading a!-füg for al-farg (A1, 332, line 4).

22. Cf. Arab Archery, p. 113: ‘Experts, however, leave the end toward the nock
untrimmed and trim closely the end toward the arrowhead, This type of trimming
is called the martin trim, because it is shaped like the wings of a martin,’

136223. When the fletchings are back to back or belly to belly the arrow is termed
in Arabic Tugháb, If they are correctly arranged, it is termed fam,

24. There is a lacuna in A}, 33b, line 3. Between al-murayyash bi-sh-shamal and
al-ayman supply yatiub ayman al- hadaf wa-‘aks* dhdlika from Aa.

136325. We challenge the accuracy of this view, preferring CD's: "The further the
fletchings from the nock, the better tlie cast, whereas the nearer they are, the
truer the course,’

26, In CD it ís recommended that soft feathers be used for summer Shooting and
hatd ones for winter and damp conditions.

136427. Nibil, pl. of nabl. Elsewhere our author uses this word in the sense of
‘dart’ or ‘boit’, but here he is quoting a North African writer who probably
used a different vocabulary. It should also be noted that the feathers are here
named right-handed or left-handed according to the principle observed in
England, Quotation from a North African writer is no doubt responsible for
Taybughà's apparent self-contradiction.

28, In CD it is specified that in this case the feathers are those of the yasij
arrow (see Glossary).

136529. CD: ‘because of their straightness’,

30. Reading ikhtalafa aqwal ar-rumat (B) for the corrupt ikh. migdàr ar-r, (A,
34a, line 6).

136631. The author expresses himself badly in Arabic, but other MSS show that this
is the sense. In D a rule of thumb is given: "To form a rough idea of the
correct length of an arrow, the arrowhead may be put under the archer's
armpit. What he then does is to stretch out his arm along the arrow, and if the
middle finger reaches the end of the nock it is right for size."

32. Specified as Egypt and Syria in a. Cf. also CD.

136733. CD.

34. CD.

136835. D*.

36. D',

136937. The precise nature of this device is uncertain. It would appear to have been
some kind of crossbow so far as the present context is concerned. According to
Dozy, Suppl, II, 447, it was originally an ‘espèce de baliste, de catapulte,
destinée à lancer des pierres, le feu grégeois, ou d'autres projectiles’. The
name was later applied to some sort of firearm. See EY*, art. Bárüd, sect, iii.

38, Reading lahu kamm mith! kamm for .. . kumm .. | kumm (A1, 35b, line 8). On
kamm in the sense of ‘quantity’, sce Redhouse, Lexicon, s.v,

1370
17.


CHAPTER 6 362-372

1371
GE RA 450-474; 2, 25a-z6a; B1, 29b-30b; B*, 26a-27a; b!, 19a-b; bY, 444-453; b5,
17b-18a; b*, to04b-1053; b, 16a-b.


NOTES AND REFERENCES 199 On thumb-guards, see also Arab Archery, pp. 123-24. On
the Turkish drawing-ring or thumb-ring, see Hein, HL, XV, pp. 18-22 and
Klopsteg, pp. 67-70.

1372I. Ao alrernative arabicized form of this word is kushtuban{kustuban. It is
found in CD and is commonly en- countered in Arabic works on archery. Cf. Arab
Archery, p. 123.

2. More properly angushrvZneh (which form is in fact given in B*, et al). An
alternative form is angushtánel, which is commonly used, for instance, in north
Yndia.

13733. Cf. Mukhassas, VI, 69 and Hcin, tbid., p. 22. The form kkayra'ah given in
Arab Archery, p. 123, would appear to be incorrect,

4. By this he may mean a kind of leather lining. Cf. drab Archery, p. 123.

1374s. Cf. CD.

6. In CD the horn of the ayyil is specified in the verse preceding the
commentary, but in which sense ayyi is to be taken we cannot be sure, for the
word may mean ‘mountain goat’, ‘antelope’, "wild ox’, etc. according to the time
and place in question.

13757. CD: ‘or copper’,

8. Literally, ‘if God makes it easy for him’. Taybugha tends to usc this
expression in connexion with anything he can do himself.

13769. CD: ‘It should not be so big that it can move around, nor yet so small that
it will pinch the thumb.”

10, Reading anfadh (A*, BL, et aL) for anfad (A1, 37a, iine 4). The root n f dh
is not normally used by our author in connexion with accuracy, but on technical
grounds it js difficult to understand how ín this context it can express any
other idea. Cf, Arab Archery, p. 124.

1377
CHAPTER 7 37a-38b


Cf. At, 474-4983 a, 26a-27b; Bt, 3o0b-31b; B*, 265—275; b!, 19b-20b; bê,
452-7473; b*, 18a-b; bt, r05a-b; b, 16a-b.  See also Hein, Isi., XIV, 330-31,
Arab Archery, pp. 16-18, and Wadtk, 22a (notes 2 and 3 below).

13781. This heading is lacking in Aa, but in Bb it introduces the portion
immediately following the end of our second paragraph: “There are differences of
opinion...”

2, The term used by Taybugha is usrádin (sic) which, strictly speaking means
nothing more than ‘master archers’, but, as we shall see later, Abū Hashim,
Tahir, Ishig, and sometimes at-Tabari, rend to be designared ‘the Imams’ (see
Ch. 23. Cf. Wadih, 22a). Hence our translation ‘Great Masters’.

13793. These are not to be confused with the arkan, or ‘pillars’, of archery (see
Ch, 2). The usd are discussed ar length by at- Tabari (Wadih, 23a-26a).

4. See Arab Archery, p. 16, n. 13.

1380
CHAPTER 8


38b-42a

1381
C£. A*, 493—53b; a, 27b-30b; B!, 31b-34b; Bt, 27b-29b; b!, 20b-22b; b*, 47a-51b;
b*, 18b-20b; bt, ro5b-107a; b, 17b-19b.

The various aspects of technique discussed in this and the following seven
chapters are dealt with differently by different authars, We shall refer the
reader to some of the more important sources which may be consulted on the
points under discussion, but it should be borne in mind that comparisons should
be avoided, and no attempt should be made to resolve discrepancies. Different
bows were used at different periods and for different purposes.

1382See Arab Archery, pp. 46-49; Hein, Z5, XV, pp. 61-64; Kiopsteg, pp. 91-94;
cf. Tabsirah, 47b-50a; Wadih, 29b-30b, 37a, 43a-b, and 47a—49b. "

1. Reading matn (aB, et al.) for barn (A1, 398, last line). t 2. b, 18a: ‘a
piece of leather... or a calf's tail’. Cf. Arab Archery, p. 48: ‘a piece of rag
or tape’.

1383
3. C adds: "They say that if the left index finger is tensed on the grip, the
arrow will drop beyond the mark, which is a good thing in flight shooting.’
Cf. D.

4. CD.

1384s. D. C£ C.

6. In B, et al., the text is worded a little differently, but the sense is the
same.

1385CHAPTER 9 42a-43b

C£. At, 53b-562; a, 30b-32a; B', 34b-36a; B*, 29b-31a; bt, 22b-232; b*, s1b-53b;
b*, zob-213; b, ro7a-r6$a;

1386
b, 195-202.  See Arab Archery, pp. 40-42, Hein, Isl, XV, pp. 67-68, Klopsteg,
pp. 96-97; cf. Tabgrah, s0b-soa; Wadih, 28b, 36b, 42b, etc. à i. CD.  2. Implied
in A, but expressed in most other MSS,


zuo NULES AND KEFERENCES

1387
3. D. In these two MSS the archer is at this point directed next to strike the
shaft against the grip and to catch it with his left index finger and
thumb. Ct. C.

4. CD. Cf. Arab Archery, P- 41.

13885. œD,

6. Sec EI, act. Bihzàd, Plate XXXIV, in which King Dara is seen nocking on
horseback. It will be noted that he is not looking at his arrow, but straight
ahead.

1389
CHAPTER 10


442-478

1390
Cf, A, 56a-oa; a, 33b-35b; B!, 362-39a; B!, 312-332; b3, 23b-25a; b*, 53-532;
b?, 21a-22b; b*, IO082-ro9b; $, 20b-22a, See Arab Archery, PP. 19-23, 43-46;
Hein, Isl, XV, Pp. 64-68; Klopsteg, PP. 94-96; cf. Tabsirah, 593—642;


2. In all other MSS the sentence ends at "lock". Our author does not express
himself clearly, and the translation could well be, ‘This is the correct way to
form the lock of ‘69’ upon which archers are agreed.’

13913. Reading al-warr (Ata, et al.) for the corrupt af-gatos (A1, 445, line 8).

4. CD.

13925. B. A: zahr,

6. CD.

1393
7. C£. Arab Archery, P- 45. In speaking of this type of lock and that
immediately following, our author is quoting from another source. This much is
clear from the change in style and vocabulary. Particularly striking is his use


n

1394
Reading là hezz (aB) for the corrupt yulahiz (A1, 46a, last linc).  According to
Arab Archery, p. 45; this was a Greek draw, IO. In the Nihàyah, Ch. ix, p. 65,
this method is attributed to Ardashir I.


e

1395
CHAPTER 11


47a-49a

1396
Cf. A, 60a-62b; a, 355-376; B', 39b-4ob; B^, 33a-343; b!, 253-268; b*, s8a-Gob;
b3, 22b-23b; b1, 1005-1103; 5, 228-234,

See Hein, 1s}, XV, P. 703 Klopsteg, p. 99. In other works the draw is treated
somewhat differently (e.g, Arab Archery, pp. 49-§2) and to draw comparisons
would serve no useful Purpose.

1397
I. D: ‘The archer wil! also present a good appearance if he has his right elbow
well out from his side and keeps his left as firm and stable as a pillar.’

2, 767-820. Famous Islamic jurist after whom one of the four orthodox schools of
law is named.

13983- Died 4.H. 50 or $5 (670-71 or 674-5). One of the earliest converts ta Islam,
Sa'd took part ín the battle of Badr, the first great battle of Muhammad’s
carect (624), and in all subsequent encounters, He commanded at the great battle
of al-Qadisiyyah (636) which broke the power of the Persian empire. Traditional
sources make much of the fact that he was the first to strike a blow for
Islam. At some point in Islamic history, which we have not been able to
determine with any certainty, his name began to be associated with archery, and
he finally emerged as the ‘patron saint" of the craft (sec Hein, Fsh, XIV,
P. 327; ibid., XV, p. 249; Klopsteg, p. 109; Baer, Guilds, P- 52, n. 19).

4. Reading tadmik (aB) for tadmid (A1, 47b, line 8),

1399. Reading khang (Aa, et al.) for hanaq (A1, 47b line 9).

Cf. Hein, Jsl., XV, p. 70; Klopsteg, p. 99.

1400
$3 AY


one of at-Tabari’s teachers and is mentioned as such by his pupil in the Wadih
(sSa-b; ist., 44a-b), Although the name is corrupt in both these MSS—as
presumably also in Berlin 5539, for Hein calls him al-Fazari (/sl., XIV,
P. 300)—there can be no doubt that his name is as stated by us, since we are
specifically told in our MSS that it derives from the name of a place on the
marches of Khorasan in territory ‘contiguous with the land of the Turks’. The
place in question is undoubtedly Faravah, originally a frontier station (ribdt)
and now Kizil Arvat in Turkmenistan on the Transcaspian railway, In spelling the
name of the man ‘al-Qarawi’ and that of the place “Qarawah’, the scribe of the
Wadik, Ist., is only one diacritical point away from accuracy, Ar-Tabari speaks
of his mentor in glowing terms as an unrivalled master who instructed him in the
teachings of Tahir’s school, In the absence of precise dutes, we can say only
that he flourished at some period during the thirteenth century.  9. Whether
these form part of what al-Farawi said is not clear,

1401
NOTES AND REFERENCES 201 CHAPTER r2 49a-52b


Cf. At, 62b-673; a, 37b-41a; B!, 40b—44a; B*, 34a-36b; b!, 262-282; b*, 60b-6sb;
b*, 23b-25b; bt, r10a-11235 b, 238-254.

1402See also Arab Archery, pp. 52-58; Hein, Jsl, XV, pp. 73-76. Important sections
on aiming arc to be found in Tabsirah, 653—72b; Wadih, 30b, 37a, 435-442, etc.

1. Reading al-gharad (a, A*, B, et al.) for al-farad (A, 492, last line).

14032. Cf. Arab Archery, p. 55. Ascham recommends the use of lights to correct a bad
habit which some archers have of looking at the shaft: ‘If a man woulde ieaue to
look at his shafte, and leame to ioke at his marke, he maye vse this waye... Let
him take his bowe on the nyght, and shoot it at .ii. lightes, and there he shall
be com- pelled to looke alwayes at his marke, & neuer at his shafte’ (p. 118).


3. CD.  4. CD.  CHAPTER 13 52b-55a Mn AS 6-7 a, 412-433; B', 44b-46b; B*,
36b-38a; bl, 28a-29b; b, 655-68b; b*, 25b-26b; b*, r12a-1133; » 25a-26b.

1404
See also Arab Archery, pp. 58-62; Hein, Isl, XV, pp. 70-72; Klopsteg,
pp. 99-100; cf. Tabsirah, 72b-75a;

Wadih, 31a-b, 37b-382a.

1405I, Defined in C as ‘half a {%t or slightly less".

2, D: ‘lt is preferable to the snatched loose because it results in greater
accuracy and better grouping as well as a sounder flight from the bow. Ir is the
first type of loose to be Jearned by a beginner.’ Cf, C,

14063. Presumably, the grandson of the Propher, 4.H. 3-49 (624/5—669/70).

4. That is, presumably, at the beginning of the nocking process when the shaft
would be placed against the grip before being pushed forward to bring the nock
on to the string. Mustafa Kani simply says that this religious formula (below,
Ch. 27, p. 153, n. 19) was to be pronounced as the archer was nocking (Hein,
Js/., XV, p. 69; Klopsteg, p. 98).

14075. ‘Allah akbar.’ This religious formula-—called the takbir—is recited at the
opening of ritual worship during which it occurs frequently.

6. We have been unable to identify this person.

14087. Possibly Abi I-*Abbàs, the first Abbasid caliph (750-54), who was commonly so
styled.

8. Hein, ibid.; Klopsteg, p. 99. The uttcrances are common religious formulae.

14099. A necessary expansion of the Arabic text based on (i) experiment and
observation, and (ii) the addition of ‘simultaneously with the loose’ in CD. .

IO, D: *,.. bringing it right back until the ends of the shoulder-blades
meet. It is a good method which will increase cast and assist the arms ro launch
the arrow on its way...’

1410r1. D.

IZ, In CD the following additional information is of interest: ‘If it should
happen that the arrow gets stuck in the grip either because it is too short, or
because the bow has been overdrawn, the arrow will break upon release and injure
the archer. He should, therefore, in such an eventuality draw back even further
and either take the arrow between his teeth or push it away with his beard.’ (C,
51a; C3, 83a-b; C?, 425-433; cf. D, 38a, D?, 642—b); *Some archers, upon
loosing, retain the position of their hands and arms ín the same vertical and
horizontal planes as in the draw so that neither the left hand nor the right
moves outwards, upwards, or downwards, This loose is called the mustawi, Used by
the Chosroes and the Wasitis, it is said to give a more accurate arrow, Others
clench their fingers upon loosing in the same way as one would in
punching. Others again loose in this way, but open the index finger as soon as
the arrow leaves the bow. In both the hand should be held steady behind the
ear.’ (D', 38a-b; D^, 64a.)

1411
CHAPTER 14 553-56a Cf, A*, 70a-71b; a, 432-44b; B’, 46b—47b; B?, 383-302; b!,
29h-30a; b°, 68b-70a; bY, 26b-27a; b, r13a-b;


b, 265-272.  The kind of follow-through described by ‘Taybugha is not mentioned
in the other works which we have consulted.  1, In CD the action is simply
defined as ‘thrusting the bow forward with the left hand’, but the complete
definition js as we indicate.  2. C: ‘thrusting the grip of the bow downwards’.
3. B (in B® read k-sawe for ka-sazer).  4. «a, supplying a lacuna in A (A!, 56a,
line 3, after as- salir).  s. D.

1412
sot eae ARANAZ INDY OR CINGCES CHAPTER 15


615-74a

1413
Cf. A*, 79a-97b; a, 486-602; B!, 47b-593; Bt, 39a-47b; b!, 30a-36b; bt, 703-8
5b; b?, 273-342; b$, I13b-119b; b, 272-34. N.B.: as this section is lacking in
C*, the symbol C below denotes only C-t,

1. In speaking of ‘Turks’, Taybugha is probably thinking of the early Mamelukes
of the so-called Bahri periog (1250-1382) whose government, established by
Turkish slave troops from the Kipchak steppe, is commonty termed ‘the Turkish
State’. As regards the term fursán Chorsemen’, sing. faris), there is no
satisfactory equivalent in English, and we are often obliged to render the tezm
periphrastically, as in this case. See n. 3 below.

14142. B.


‘use of the term ‘knight’ in translating the latter because of its connotations
for the English reader. For further details see Ayalon in EI*, s.v. and Scripta,
IX, pp. 34-37.  4. “Companions of the Prophet' ís the technical designation of
the personal friends of Muhammad, later extended

1415
8. Reading either ar-rigab dériyah (aB?, et al.) or ar-rikabdariyah (B'b', et
al.) for the corrupt ar-rikab dá irah (A, 63b, line 6).  9. Our interpretation
is based on information in CD, IO. a.  r1, B. ; I2. Reading jarr al-qaws (B) for
the misplaced ka-n-nisy +++ wa-phayrihima l-qazs (A}, 67a, lines 4-5).  B.


14. B.

141615. B. y

16. These last seven words translate bi-ta'annf^ wa-ikhlágin min al-warr (A!,
67b, line 8). Bi-ta'anni^ may imply holding after the draw and before the loose,
for in a (55a) the same word is used to explain precisely that concept.

141717. B!, et al.

18. In A}, 68b, line 3, ai-a'Ià and yadihi bi-I-gatos must be transposed.

1418I9. CD: *with the arrowhead over the horse’s right ear’. In g it is the lowet,
not the upper, limb that must be set obliquely over the horse's neck, a method
which is given as an alternative in BbbC.

20, In CD a range of ten cubits is given as the best for this position. j

14192I. This manceuvre requiréd the rider to modify his seat by setting the upper
right thigh on the saddle and turning his left thigh to accord with the change
in position (CD).

22. @ adds: dor so long as it takes to count three or less to a'low the limbs to
settle".

142023. a adds: "To do this he sets the inside of his fist centrally over the
highest part of his horse's croup.’

24. B adds: ‘Against the horseman in your rear you also have the possibility of
two other kinds of shot between the upward and downward directions
(i.e. presumably, = more or less horizontal shot from the bow in an oblique
Position and another from the bow in a vertical position) which brings the
number to six.’ Cf. bdC, In a the text is confused and bewildering: ‘that is, up
and down on both sides of the horse. There will then be four shots: two from the
middle Can al-wasaf) up and down, and two from the left side... The passage as a
whole is problematical. One element of confusion almost certainly resides in the
word ‘asir *difficuit (last word ia our paragraph) which at some stage has bcen
misread as “ashar ‘ten’, suggesting in the Arabic that there are ten kinds

1421
27. B.

28. In B, et al, it is the tight hand and not the left forearm that is to be
placed in the nape. ‘Right’ may well have been intended since Taybughi, possibly
left-handed himself, makes this kind of mistake clsewhere. That the text is
intelligible ag it stands, however, is clear from CD: “What the archer does
(sc. in order to nock and lock) is to place his left hand together with the bow
at the nape between his head and neck and then to nock on his right shoulder and
lock, ete,’ We are further informed: ‘You may nock the arrow with the reins held
in your left hand. You then raise both arms, tuck your head under the right
forearm and shoot.

142229. Reading farasifi (aB) for gawsihi (A+, 712, line 7).

30. B.

1423at. B.


NOTES AND REFERENCES 203

1424
32. Reading al-khashabah (B, et al.) for al-janb (A, 72a, line 4) which is an
obvious corruption of kiashad.

33. B.

142534. a: “His Excellency (ai-maqurr) the late Sayf ad-Din Azdamur, the Treasurer,
Viceroy of Tripoli’; B'5: ‘the late Azdamur, the Treasurer of the Viceroy of
Tripoli’. We have found no record of any Azdamur who governed Tripoli between
A.H. 770 (1368-9), the date at which Taybughà completed his poem {though not his
commentary; sec Introduction) and A.H. 799 (1397), the year of our earliest
datable MS, in which he is described as such. If the person in question was in
fact Viccroy of Tripoli, Azdamur may be a textual! corruption of Aydamur, who
ruled in that capacity about 1371-2 (Sobernheim, Matériaux, 2me partie,
pp. 118-19). The latter, however, is styled dateddar (‘Keeper of the Inkweli’),
not &haznadar (‘Treasurer’). The reading of a probably refers to a viceroy
appointed in A.H, 880 (1475-6) (ibid., pp. 57-58, 129-30), which, since it is
too late for our present purpose, is useful only for estimating the date of the
MS.

3$. The holder of a Mameluke office introduced by Baybars (Ayalon, BSOAS, XVI,
1954, p. 69). Originally re- crutted—during the Circassian period, at any
rate—from military amirs of the second or third class, this officer was charged
with responsibility for the game-bird enclosures and the royal hunt (see Popper,
Egypt and Syria, p. 94).

142636. In our text the plea for God's mercy (rarhim) which usually follows the
mention of a deceased person includes the horse. If the fact is at all
significant, it would seem to indicate the horse archer’s attachment to his
mount.  In all other MSS, the zarkim is restricted to the person. It is probably
a casc of deliberate correction prompted by religious susceptibility.

37. D.

142738. B.

39. B.

142840. Reading at-tafwig for at-tawfig (A, 743, line 2).

«41. B.  42. 4: ‘120 arm-spans’,

1429
CHAPTER r6


742-75b

1430
At, lacking. Cf. a, 602—612; B!, 102a-1042; B*, 772-782; b*, 142a-144b; b*,
57b-583; b‘, 141b—142b; b, 60a-61a Our microfilm of b' (above, p. 195) does not
include this portion.  r. This chapter poses various problems. We confine
ourselves to noting:

(a) that it is completely lacking in At;

1431(b) in a it is placed between the sections on mounted archery and bracing;

(c) in Bbb it forms the second part of a short and, in many ways, obscure
section on the shooting of crossbows ; it concludes that part of the work
dealing with archery proper (as opposed to the legal discourse on shooting); it
is headed *On Shooting the Crossbow on Horseback' and begins as follows:

1432“The purpose of the stirrup on a crossbow is to enable the archer to draw it on
horscback by usin? a drawing-strap in the usual manner...’

z. B.

14333. B. Our text is Jess explicit.

4. B. -

14345. la a this weight—mentioned here for the first and only time—is stated simply
as 100 ratis,

6. Literally, ‘the long bow’, i.e. the normal hand bow which shoots full length
arrows. For obvious reasons we

1435avoid rendering it as ‘long bow’,


CHAPTER 17 75b-82a

1436
Cf. A*, 975-992 (containing only the section on bracing on horseback); a,
61a-67b; Bt, 59a-66b; B*, 47b-52b; b!, 373-41b; b*, 8sb-95b; b?*, 342-383; b*,
119b-123b; b, 342-393.  1. B (reading Aina for harra in B$).  2. In B the
instructions are somewhat differently expressed: the archer is to have the back
of the grip towards his forearm und the belly towards his finger-ends.  . In the
Arabic ‘the nock in the neck of the bow’,


Adopting the most explicit version contained in B!b!-*, Cf. also B?b*b,

1437Reading /rayliht (aB!) for kilah (A*, 77b, line 8).

B: ‘to coo! and settle’. Correction by heat is evidently assumed.

1438Io. Reading yitir"ka (B!b?) for yu'athir*hu (A!, 77b, line 10).

11. b.

143912. By another method not indicated in Aa the mounted archer could brace from
either right or leít by lodging the neck of the lower limb beneath the
stirrup-leather (B, et al.).


3

14404. d.

5. a adds: ‘or the dustar'.  6. B

1441y?

8.

1442
*


204 NOTES AND REFERENCES

1443
13. This is unquestionably the sense of the ungrammatical hadhihi s-sifatani
th-thaldthah (A?) which reflects a colloquialism (cf, ba'di yomayn taldta ‘in a
few days’ time’). Given the context, hadkihi i-sfat ath-thalathah (At, 79, line
8) is unacceptable and has ied to all kinds of confusion in other MSS.

I4. At this point a goes on: “flexes the bow with both hands together and
braces. This method is more suited to a highly reflexed bos. If unsuccessful
with it, he shouid set the grip evenly under both knees fand procced to flex
with both hands together. In this way the obscurity of this sentence which has
led to confusion in other MSS is dispelled,

144415. B.

16, Sce Dozy, Suppl, I, 860. From the Persian barshak, this word occurs in the
MSS with different spellings and vocalizations, e.g. barshag, barsag, baghsaq,
baghshaq, etc.

144517. B.

18. B.

144619. B.

20. The term saysarah is lacking in Bbb. These MSS merely indicate that the
loops should be made of bowstring or leather after the fashion of the loop of a
string.

144721. B—in preference to ‘as you would in drawing the stirrup crossbow’ (A}, 81b,
line 3).

22. B.

1448
CHAPTER r8 82a-83b


Cf. A*, 99a-10ca is incomplete (see n. 2 below); a, 68a—69a; B?, 66b-67b; B®,
52b—53b; b}, 41b-42a; b’, 95b-97a; b*, 38a-39a; b*, 123b-124b; b, 38b-39a. a

1449I. B, supplying a lacuna ín A between ai-‘alantah (A`, 82b, line 8) aud ngah*
(line 9).

2, al-wugüf (B: al-qiydm) al-harbi. This section is lacking in A* which goes
straight on to flight shooting.

14503. Reading az-saghawdan (B3, er al.) for ar-raghawan (A!, 83a, line 4).

4. Conjecturing at-turs for al-qaws (A), 83a, line 8) in spite of the unanimity
of all MSS.

1451
CHAPTER 19 83b-86b


C£. A*, rooa-1043; a, S9a-71b; BY, 67b—70b; B*, 53b-55b; b', 42b-442; b*,
97a-r01a; b’, 39a-40b; bt, 124b-1263; b, 39a-40b.

1452I. Literally, ‘quick to return’ (sc. to jts reflexed shape.) A bow reverting to
its unbraced form is described as ‘returning to its back’ (rdji'ah nahio?
zahriha; see Glossary).

2. B.

14533. B.

4- The Arabic of this sentence presents difficulty. The term translated as
‘elevated object’ is kKawkab, the usual meaning of which is ‘star’. It is so
understood in B, et al., but we reject this sense on scientific grounds in
favour of some such meaning as is given in Dozy, Suppl., s.v.: ‘chambre haute,
chambre qui est en haut de la maison, du palais’. As regards the sentence as a
whole, the import is in no doubt. The archer is advised to select a high point
and to stand at such a distance from it that it is at 45° to his horizontal line
of sight. In this way he could be sure of his elevation,

14545. B.

6. Hádd an-nafdah bi-I-ijlaq ‘having a sharp, clean loose’ (i.e. disengaging
swiftly and cleanly with a smart snap of the fingers) is the reading of Aa. Bbb
(the corrupt B'b* excepted) offer the easier reading nahdah for nafdah, but see
Glossary.

14557. A'aB: ‘brethren’ (ikhwān for ansáb) (A1, 852, last line).

8. B adds: ‘where a Muslim is concerned’,

14569. Ablution before prayers is strictly enjoined in the Koran. The worshipper is
required to wash his face, hands, and arms to the elbows, and to wipe his head
and feet to the ankles. This is thc lesser ablution (wagt) as opposed to the
greater (ghus/), in which the body is washed completely after major pollutions,
Since the narrator was not at prayer, we can conclude that he was either a
non-Muslim or was irreligious.


CHAPTER 20 86b-88b Cf. At, roga-107a; a, 72a-74a; B!, 772-79; B*, $0a-61b; b!,
48a-49b; b*, 109b-112b; b*, 44b-46a; bt, 129b-130b; b, 44b-45b.  1. B. "e
2. Literally, ‘upper part of the zind’. The term zind is—in the present work, at
least—of much wider application than the English ‘wrist’, by which it is usually
rendered. It covers that part of the hand below the wrist-joint.

1457
The upper part must, therefore, bc what we would loosely term the wrist. This
view is confirmed by CD, in which the precise point is specified as the carpal
end of the radius. É


NOTES AND REFERENCES 205

1458
. Seven are actually listed in the text, The onc excluded from our list is the
fist, for if the three fingers are tensed, it follows that the fist will also be
tensed. It is worth noting that Mustafa Kani also excludes the fist (Isl, XV,
p. 235).


4. ‘Hal ssa-' uytib. Yt is almost certain that ‘iat is intended to mean
‘injuries’ and nor ‘defects’, Cf. Mustafa Kani’s

1459
“illet ve-‘uyiid which Hein, from his translation ‘faults’, cvidently regards as
synonymous (dsf, XV, p. 237).

. Aa. B: iarbid; b!: tazbid; b*: tazyid. Other MSS in b are cither not vocalized
or ilegible. The reading of Aa is most likely correct, the words immediately
following taznid (sc. wa-garb4 i-watr li-z-zind) being intended to explain ít
(A', 87a, line 9). More than once the author uses wa (‘and’) in the explanatory
sense of ‘or’.

1460. In A min madi" r-rish should follow kasarahu (A+, 87b, line 8) and al-ibhám
min mawdi ! r-rish be deleted from the first line of the next folio (582). :


7. al-'agd, or less probably, al-‘ugad ‘the phalanges’.

1461
8. The MSS are divided between fag ‘nock and mufawwag meaning, presumably, ‘the
point in the nock against which the string should be lodged’. The latter permits
an interpretation consistent with the facts of practical experience.

9. aB.

146210. bł}. AB read ‘is relaxed’.  CHAPTER 2r 885-922 Cf. A*, 1072-1122; a,
742-77b; B!, 792-82; B7, 615—642; b!, 49b-51b; b*, r12b-117b; b*, 462-47b; b*,
130b-132a; b, 45b-48b.  1. Aa. Bb: ‘proximal’; b: ‘inside of the middle
phalanx’.  2. aB


MONA A

1463
3. a for the corrupt infilat al-fisad (A', 89b, line 6; A7). It may well be that
the word mazdi' has dropped out before


al-fisad, for in B!b!^? the reading is ingilab mazdi'! L-fisddah (in B?b*b the
last word is read as hisádah).

1464
. Supplying id after dhàálika (A!, goa, line 6) from aB, et al.


aB!b'-4, supplying a lacuna between al-madd al-juwwdani and wa-min Tasg (At, 90,
line 8).

1465
. Reading garasa (A*aB*, et al.) for fard (A', 9ob, line 7).  . In å there is
additional material on (i) blistering of the distal phalanx of the thumb arising
from tension of the


thumb in drawing or a split in the thumb caused by the side of the handle, and
(ii) blistering of the middle phalanx of the right index finger, caused by the
thumb's rubbing against the right index finger, a relaxed thumb, shooting with a
copper thumb-ring, and failure to unfold the index finger at the loose.

1466
. This section, which is lacking in Aa, is supplied from Bbb. Our rendering is
based on b*b* in which there is


least textual corruption,

1467
. Meaning, presumably, that the thumb is not lodged firmly on the middle finger.


CHAPTER 22 92a-97b

1468
Cf. At, 112a-113a (incomplete); a, 77b-83a; B+, 82b-88a; B*, 642-682; b!,
$1b—55a; b!, 1175-1258; b?, 47b-512; b$, 1322-1358; 5, 485—522.


I.

1469
9.  IO.


II.  12.  13.  14.  15.  16.  17.  18, I9.  20.

1470
2 3 4 5.  6 7 8


Reading fi r-rimdyah (aB*, et al.) for fi z-ziyadah (À', 92a, line 7).

1471. Reading min ar-rumat (B, er al.) for fi z-ziyadah (A!, 92a, line 8),

, A‘, 92b, line 4: ‘right index finger’. So also Bbb (b? excepted).

1472. aB.

This remark seems to imply that the expression for the tall man's draw was, or
included, the term sacwád (“black”) as opposed to bayád (‘white’). See our
discussion of these terms, pp. 127-29.

1473. To which writer and book our author refers, we do not know. Jamshid is, it is
well known, an Iranian name.


. Contrary to recognized teaching.  . Tn explanation the author equates
targutewoh (‘clavicle’) with kursa’ which usually means the carpal end of the

1474
ulna—a sense which it cannot have in this context.

The author's Arabic is poor, and the words translated as ‘proximal phalanges’
are wrongly pointed. We must read al-'ugad al-wwal (al-üla).

1475Al}, 04a, last line: * Isma'il ar-Raffa‘*, which is a patent error. A? begins
with our sentence immediately following ‘ar-Raffa*’ (112a).

Reading zind (aB) for watr (A).

1476For the obviously corrupt taqsir at-tawi? (A, 94b, line 3).

AaBb: ‘protrusive’, which appears to be a slip on the part of the author (sce
p. 116, line 12). We emend,

1477At this point A? (113a) passes to the section on the Great Masters (our Ch. 23).

B.

1478B.  Reading al-ityān (aB, et al.) for al-itdr (A}, 96a, line 4).

a adds: ‘and is a plcbeian way of shooting".

1479Reading yagiil bi-s-sthbatihi (aB) for y. nashatthu (À!, 96a, line 9).  v. 38
(12b). Cf. Ch. 3, p. 9.


206 NOTES AND REFERENCES

1480
21. Reading fa-in zadat agabi «Au (B) for fa-in zada isthar*hu (A!, 97a, line
8).  22. ABbb: "squarely', which must be crroncous since it conflicts with all
the evidence of the chapter. We emend,


CHAPTER 23 1062-1082

1481
Cf. A®, 113a-116a; a, 91b-93b; BY, 97b-995; B3, 742-75h b', 60a (microfilm
incomplete); b?, 1362-1392; bà, 55a- 563; bt, r39b—140b; b, 57a-58b.  1. For the
sake of convenience this section is taken out of the sequence in which it is
placed in A?, et al. (but not A7, which, to ali intents and purposes, offers the
same arrangement as that adopted here).  2. In the Arabic text this first
paragraph of ours is preceded by our second. We transpose in the interests of a
mote natural order.  3. Delete wa-in before king (A', 106a, line 3).
4. Explanation based on Wadih, 28a.  5. B


6, Reading min bayn (B, et al.) for min lin (A1, 1072, linc 7) which is not,
however, impossible since "relaxation?  of the thumb and index finger would
allow waier to seep down, 7. Reading gharad for farad (A1, 1078, last line).
8. b adds; ‘so that the black would be revealed’, 9. B, 10. The nest eleven
words defeat us. They read: ‘At-Tabari shot efter the manner of Abü Hishim
*bi-]- ghilmántyyah", after the manner of Tahir and Abū (sic) Ishaq
"bi-i-fa'idah (or ?: bi-l-g@idah)"2 Pethaps ghibndnivyah and fa'idah (or
ga@’idan) are types of bow.

1482
CHAPTER 24


97b-99a

1483
A*, lacking. Cf. a, 83a-84b; B1, 89a-b; B*, 682—692; bt, 552-568; b*, 125a-126b;
b*, s1a-sIb; b* 135a-13$b; b, 52a-b.  I. The text is corrupt, In A! (982) delete
the last four words of line 6 and the first of line 7 and read: Fi bag L-ayyàm
after sahib" (line 6, sixth word).  2. aB. There is a lacuna in A! (98a, last
line).


CHAPTER 25 992-1032

1484
A’, lacking except for the section on the Tazor-arrow, r18b~r20a; Cf. a,
84b-88b; E), 89b-93a; B*, 692-712; b1, 56a-60a; b*, 136a-137b; b?, 51b-535; b$,
r36a-137b; b, 532-572.  I. The Arabic reads: ‘to the end of your draw’. It is
quite clear, however, that the interpretation of these words is as we indicate,
: 2. B.  3. What seems to be implied is that if the archer is fully prepared to
shoot before leaning over the edge of the well, he will expose himself for such
a fleeting moment that the enemy will be left no time to draw back and shoot,
4. Cf. Tabsirah, 755—762, 5. B?, 6. The average time of flight at this range
would be under two seconds, The rate of counting must, therefore, be fairly
fast. ` 7. Reading ashbar (aB) for ashy@ (A!, tooa, line 5).  8. Reading
tas/rudd" fihimá habalon (a, Cf. B, et al.) for tashudd*hu fihima (A!, 1003,
last line).  9. Reading ai-ftabal (aB) for al-jabal (A, rooa, last line).  to,
In this section and the next a distinction is made between the nock (füg? as a
section of the arrow and the nock as the notch (4a2) into which the string fits.
IT. Reading ‘cad? (aB) for 'ard» (A', rorb, line 1),


I3. Reading masdid (B) for mashdid (A?, rotb, line 5). A somewhat different
version is offered in B, et al, which at this juncture continues: ‘It is then
slotted lengthwise as far as two-thirds of its length, the slot being just big
enough to take the bowstring. At the stopped end is fitted a tassel of silk or
cord so that it can be held (between the middle finger?) and ring-finger. The
device is used as follows. You slip the julbak on to the bowstring, place the
nock in the julbah, lock. and shoot.”

148514. If the nock was split accurately down the centre at right-angles to the
notch, the razor inserted, and the tail of the shaft bound with sinew up to the
base of the noch, the nock would not be very much weakened.

I5. Or, perhaps: ‘whose nock has been removed’, The Arabic is ambiguous,

1486
NOTES AND REFERENCES 207


16. In Bbb this section follows that dealing with arrow-guides (out Ch. 26),
which is placed immediately after that on nockless arrows. Both in content and
presentation the version contained in these MSS differs from ours.  Because of
textual corruption and certain differences in wording in the various MSS the
following rendering is based on a composite text:

1487
On Shooting Iron Pellets with a Hand Bow


For this purpose you usc a tube (juléak) of iron or copper big enough to take
the pellets. This tube should have a tang (silàz) like an arrowhead and be
mounted on an unfletched arrow. You drill a hole in the shaft near the place
where the fletchings are fitted (b: ‘below the nock’) into which you can insert
something to hold the arrow to the bowstring so that it will not fly when shot,
With another cord you attach the arrow to the grip, but not so tightly that it
will not allow the arrow free movement (5: ‘when drawn’). To shoot, you nock the
arrow, secure it to the string, put the pellet in the tube, lock, and shoot
without following through with any forward and downward movement of the left
arm. This technique is of great value in battles and sieges because the archer
can heat the iron pellets in the fire and shoot them to ignite anything he may
choose, such as bales of cotton used to barricade points that have been breached
by a mangoncl, and so on. It can also be used for shooting birds and other
creatures with clay pellets. If small pellets are used, they can be employed to
wound beasts of burden and unprotected men . . . For the purpose of shooting
pellets, an arrow-guide has been designed after the style of the king-guide,
complete with a cylindrical cjector (midfa* mudawwar) which is fitted on to the
string, The pellets are then inserted and shot. Iron pellets heated to a glow
and shot into the midst of troops is a specta- cular stratagem in battle, The
technique can be used for business or pleasure. You can also use a tube big
enough to take a hen’s egg, which you can then shoot. This is a cunning stunt,
If you like, you can drain the egg, fill it with resin, and launch it at your
enemy. It is a very useful means of firing ships and the like. You can also fill
the egg with quick-lime and shoot it into the enemy’s face, or else you can pack
it with resin or some resin compound or pitch, and so on. Special crossbow
arrows can also be used for the same purpose...”

148817. Reading Ahurribat (a) for the meaningless jurribat (A!, 1022, line 7).

18. The idea seems to be that the end by which this device was fitted to the
shaft formed a tight-fitting tubular socket,

148919. Reading füg for farq (åt, to2b, line 3).

20. Bowstrings are often bound at the nocking-point to withstand the chafe of
the nock. There is no mention of such a practice in our treatise, but this docs
not exclude the possibility of its existence, Whether the leather band referred
to was fitted only to strings intended for use with a guide of the type
described, we cannot say,

1490
CHAPTER 26 103a-105h


At, lacking. C£. a, 89a-91b; B!, 93a-96b; B*, 712—732; bt, 58a-59b; b*,
1312-135; b?, 530-540; b', 137b-139b; 0, 55a-s6b.  I. Reading kamā yard (aB) for
kamā yamil* 'an (A}, 103a, lines 7-8).  2. B, 3. Presumably the guide is
conceived as 2 protective cover comparable to a sultan, who, according to a
common Islamic concept, covers his subjects with the shade of his protection.
4. Reading khafrak (B'b!-*) for i129 (At, 103b, line 9).  5. aB. Lacking in A,
6. B'h add: ‘or copper".  7. Qad sahhala tah” ihkam? I-gabdah wa-quwwattha
za-takhfif* 1-'adal! wa-shiddat*ha (A1, 104b, lines 3-4). In aBbb this sentence,
in which there are mistakes of spelling and pointing, is misunderstood,
8. Conjectural interpretation. If translated literally, the author contradicts
himself by declaring that the guide previously described as difficult is ‘easier
to use . . . than ail other kinds’.  9, Reading sitat niba! (B) for sttrar®™
bi-thaldth (A!, 1052, linc 2).  ro. In B, ez al, this chapter is followed by a
section on shooting pellets with a crossbow. (In B? the heading is incorrect.)

1491
CHAPTER 27 56a-6rb


C£. A*, 71b-793; à, 44b-43b; B', 70b-77a; B*, 55b-59a; b', 44a-472; b?,
rora-107b; b, gob-43b; bt, 126a-128b; 5, 40b-43b. :

1492r. Misplaced in Aa between the sections on the follow-through and mounted
archery (Ch. 14 and 15). In its original position it probably followed the
section on flight shooting (Ch. r9), as it does in Bbb, Its place in our
sequence has been determined by our inference that it was originally intended as
a conclusion (see next note), Its connexion with Ch. 28 is close, and a natural
scquence is broken if the two are separated. The connexion is recognized in Bbé
in which no break in sequence occurs,

2. There is a lacuna in A, which should be supplied on the indication of aBbé by
verses corresponding in A? to VV. 137-9 (185, lines 5-7) of thc poem. Their
place and role in the poem determine the place of this section in our sequence
of chapters.

1493
-4--


2 -= vnm nyug vacua uuwi“ nas been corrected by the scribe. Cf.

1494Mustafa Kani’s kepade, the Turkish form of what is to all intents and purposes
the same word (Hein, Isl, XV, E 251; Klopsteg, pp. 110, rz).  B.  . Thabatat, B,
et al,: tubi'at ‘are conditioned’, or perhaps pubis'at ‘trained’.  a.  8. B, et
al. present a slightly different version, according to which the beginner should
from the outset be apprenticed

to a master (ustádh), for he must have a mentor (shaykh) to guide him. Should he
fail to find one, he can then

1495
consult authorities on archery (ulamd' ar-ramy, etc.).  B.


IC. Or, according to a, ‘in his relations with’.

149611. In B the second half of the sentence reads: ‘and shoot with them according
to the way in which he sees them shoot without interfering with them until he is
conversant with their wont, their technicalities, and their drii’,

I2, For muta'allim and mu'ailim the terms mubtadi and muntahi are substituted in
B, et ai,

149713. In the course of this chapter the author adduces several sayings attributed
to the Prophet, to which, in the interests of economy of space, we do not attach
references, While some can be traced either in one or other of the two most
authoritative collections of tradition—essembled by ai-Bukhári (d. 870) and
Muslim (d. 875)—or in the works of other important compilers, such as an-Nasii'i
(d. 915) or Ibn Majah (d. 886), others can not. In any case, even the best
sources are no guarantee of authenticity.

I4. See Ch. 19, n. 9.

1498IS. A rak'ah is a devotional exercise in Muslim ritual prayer, consisting of
seven movements with appropriate recitations. Described in the simpiest terms,
it is a bending of the trunk from the upright position followed by two
prostrations. At each of the five set times of daily prayer the act of worship
consists of a fixed number of rak'ahs.

16. Cousin and son-in-law of Muhammad (d. 640), »

149917. B: ‘tucks up his sleeves if they are too long’.

18. Reading sábil^^ (R!b!-*) for saline" {A}, 59a, line 1).

1500I9. A religious formula termed the basmaiah and used by Muslims at the beginning
of any important act to invoke God's biessing upon it.

20. In B, et ai, this theologically distasteful asseveration has been toned
down, and the modified text merely reads: *, a. Will become the object of hatred
and contempt’.

15012r. Ar, ‘es-sahihayn’, by which one usually understands the works of al-Bukhari
and Muslim (above, n. 13). Muslim and Ibn Májah, however, are the sources for
the tradition in question.

22. In A the text is corrupt. After hadatka (A1, 61a, line 6), we must delete wa
and supply the words toz-ya'rif * min ayy! wayh'" hadatha fa-idha (B ibia,

1502
CHAPTER 28 108a—r09a Cf, A*, 116a-118b; a, lacking; B!, 756-778; B*, 59a-Goa;
b!, 47a-48a; b', 107b-109b; b?, 43b-44b; bf, 128b-


129b; b, 43b-44b.  1. So A, but B: ‘father’. In Islamic law the latter is
Correct. By ‘boy’ is meant a boy below the age of puberty.  2. Reading yukthirü
min ihtirám (B*) for yukthira . . . (A*, 108b, line 7).  3. In B, et ai. these
five words are omitted for some reason—possibly religious—that is not entitcly
clear.  4. In B, et al. there is no mention of the dog. No urban Muslim Arab
would welcome comparison with an animal that is regarded as unclean by orthodox
Islam.  5. B offers one or two extra lines, the content of which is of no great
importance,

1503
Accoutrements, horse archer’s, 71 f., 79 f.

Accuracy: a pillar of archery, 5; affected by arrow, xxix by brac- ing height,
23, 98, by thumb- guard, 36, by loose, 65 f., 201 nn.  2*, 12, by faults, 112
f., 116 f., by increased rate of shooting, 142.

1504‘Aid’, horse-archer’s, 71 f., 79 f.

Aim (-ing): 58-62; a fundamental, 40 £; synonymous with sight- ing, 40; see alio
sighting.

1505‘Aja’ib al-üthür (3l-Jabaru), r56.

Anchor-point, anchoring (defined), 126 f., 174; see draw, drawing.

1506Arab Archery, xxxiii f., xxxix, & passim (quoted).

Archers and archery: in East, West, xxv, & passim; Andalusian, 9, 103; Arab,
xxiii, 6, 10, 53, 106; Chincse, 149, 156; Egyp- tian, 103; English, xxxii, 31;
Japanese, $5, $7, 62, 65; Khorasanian, xxiii, 6, 17, 39, 103, 133; Korean, 119,
149 f.; Maghrebi, 8 f., 146; Mameluke, passim; Middle Eastern, passim; Ottoman
(flight), xxxii, 29, 67, ro6 ff.; Parthian xxv, 78; Persian, 6, 17, 20, 37-40,
$5, 62, 78, 102, 105 f,, £25, 148; Syrian xl n. 13, & passim: Tatar, 78; Turkish
(other than Otoman flight), Turkmens, xxüi, 6, 17, 26, 34, 39 f., 44.  47 £., 77
£, 83, 148; mounted, see horse-archers; see also archery.

1507Archer's licence, 155 f.

Archer's ring, see thumb-ring.

1508Archery: technical introduction, xxiv-xxxii; Muslim literature on, xxxii-iv; and
islam and/or Prophet, 3, 37, 64 f, 125, 153 ff., 196, n. 1', zor nn, 5 & 8, 202
n. 4; pillars of 5, 199 n. 3*; superiority of, 5; funda- mentals, 40 f.; Great
Masters of, xxxiv, 37-40, 130-35, 199


INDEX OF SUBJECTS

1509
(including titles of treatises, &c.)


n.2}; on horseback, 77-89 (see also horse-archers); miscellane- ous techniques,
&c., 177-44; schools, systems of, 4130-753 training in, 136, 152 ff,; con- duct,
courtesy, ethics in, 152- 58; professional organization in, 155.

1510Arm (of bow), 174.

Arm-span (measure), 160.

1511Armour; shooting in, 10z, 132 £3 laminae of, 26, 198 n. tr.  ARROW(S): 24-33,
104-108, 164-

66, 174 f., 190, 197, & passim; see also bolts, darts.

1512Balance, 27 f., 107.

Behaviour and performance: with thumb-lock xxv & Fig. 1; affected by their
thickness, thinness, 28, by their heaviness, tightness, 141 f, by size of nock,
24, by atmospheric con- ditions, 108; breakage, 104, 112; slapping of
arrow-pass, $6, II2, 116, 121; defiection, 56, 65 f., 68, 116; spin, 32; Qs
flight, 66; flirting, 20, $5, 66 175, 197 n. 3°; gadding, 106, 113, 175;
wagging, 106, 112, 116; trajectory, 138, I4l f; faults causing gain in height,
1z2, loss of range, 67, 112 f., 116 f., low flight, 69, 112, 116, 121; increased
— penetrative power from loose, 65; velocity, 26, $3, 55, 65 Ë., 105, 137, I41
Í.; when overdrawn 33; range of target/war arrows, 30, of flight arrows, 104,
109 f.

1513Feathers /fictchings: 26 f., 77 £; parts of, 32 (Fig. x6); kinds, 26 f.; cagle,
vulture, 26, 31; secondaries, 26; tail-feathcrs, wing-pinions, 26 f., 31; left-
handed, right-handed, 26, 31 £., 198 n. 27; soft, hard, 198 n. 26; light, 27;
cutting, 26; martin trim, 32, 198 n, 22; shapes, 26, 32; size, 26; low, 24;
high, long, short, 26;


209

1514
number, 26, 32, 164; prepara- tion and fixing, 31; position, 26 f., 164, 198
n. 25; spiralling, 27, 32; back to back, belly to belly, 198 n. 23; on flight
arrows, 26; on ydsij arrows, 198 n. 28; and wind, 27.


Grouping in target: ro, 21, 26,

1515
105, 138, 147 (test for), 156, 175.


Handling: taking hold of, by 'pen'

1516
method, 47 f, by Turkish method, 47 f., (73); removal from quiver on horseback,
73; supporting at grip, 47 fi, pinching nock, 117, 119, 121.


Head: 25 f. & Fig. 15, 32, PI. 6;

1517
armour-piercing, 25 f, 31, I93 nn. 15 & 18; blunt, 29, 174, 198 n. 10; bodkin,
31; broad- head, 26, 31, 197 n. 9*; butt (amàji), 29, 77. 1795 198 n. 10;
chisel-head, 26, 31; flight, 108; hunting (haydarijjamwari?), 26, 31, 197 n. 95;
for jarkh, 28; for mukbulah, 28; olive-shaped, 26, 31; rounded, 26; ‘square’,
25, 28; target (maydáwi), 26, 28; ‘criangular’, 25, 28; war (harbi, vaghlig),
28, 31, (Turk- ish), 26, 109; tempering, 26, 198 u. 16; tang, 26, r98 n. 15;
mounting, 26; behuviour and performance of heavy, light, large, 25, 28


Length: how to ascertain, 27, 33,

1518
56, 198 n. 3r; of maydäni ‘full-length’, 27, 33; of flight


arrow, tos, ITO.,

1519
Nock; 25 & Fig. 15, 164 f, & Fig,


$5, & passim; terminology (Adz ‘nock’, füg ‘nockpiece’), 117, 138, 181, 1&4, 206
n. rot; Size, 24, 27 f., 32 f., in maydáni and gighaj arrows, 33; not to be
shortened to suit lock, $3; pinching of, 117, 119, r21.

1520
Parts of, and nomenclature: 164-


166, 174.

1521
ARROW(S): cont,


Shaft: terminology, 164 ff.; basic requirements, xxix; of target arrows, 24, 28
f.; of flight arrows, 108; shape (barley- grain, candíc-form, straight- hewn),
24 & Fig. 14, 188 f.; spinning test, 30; erooked, 118; thin, weak, rough, rzr;
head socket, 164 f., painting of sinew areas, 164.

1522Types: 164 f.; barrelled, 174; butt (amdji), 29, 164; cylindri (yümár), 77, 164;
flight (sabgi, sahm as-sibàq), 26. 29, 104—108, 190; ‘full-length’ (tamám), 27,
190; hunting (haydari]


janmwari?), 29; hagwah, 164;

1523
incendiary, 143 £.5 Jarkh, 27 f.; Rdz, 164; kharr (?), 24, 197 n.6*; long
(rami), 24, 28 fi., 145 f, 147, 190; mibalah, mi'rdd "us iri. mishgas, misrd*,
164; nockless 138 f., 142; practice (unfletched ‘jarram'’), 152, 184; rakb, 164;
razor (sahm ai-mís), 138 F, 142 f, I90, 206 n. 14; sbkd (?), 164; sect onal,
105, ro7 £f; short (quri"), 24, 29 F., IOS, to9, 190 (see also dart); for
gourd-shoot- ing (gabag), 77; for shooting ‘at the slant’ (qighaj), 77; target
(maydani), 25 ff.; war (karbi, yaghlig), 2$ f., 28; »asij, 77, 164, 198 n. 28.

Weight: target/war arrows, 30 f.  flight arrows, 104, 110.

1524
Arrow-guides: 28, 105, 106 f£,


140, 145-51 & Figs. 49-53, 174; origins, 148; types: ‘Bayram Shah’, 145,
‘commander's’ (asbdsalári), ‘dart (nabh, ‘hailstone’ (lubdn), hexagonal, 145,
149, 'king-guide' (shah majrápnijrat), 145 f, 150 £.; Korean, 149 f. & PL 17,
‘locust’ (jardd), 145, 150, ‘long-nosed’, 146, Maghrebi, 146, octagonal, 149,
‘pen’ (galam), 145, 149 f.  round, square, 149, 'stirrup- guide’ (mmjrát
ar-rikab), 146, 150 f., Turkish flight shooter's (siper), 106 f. & Fig. 40, 119,
II3, 119; on missiles see darts.

1525
Arrowhead, see arrows, Arrow-pass: 49, 174; slapped by


arrow, 56, T12, rar.

1526
Atmospheric conditions, see flight


shooting.

1527
Back (of bow), xxv f., 174, & passim.  Backed, see bow.

Baghdad weight, 30, 160,

1528Bamboo in flight arrow, 108.

Bark (bow vencer), xxvi.

1529Barreiled, see arrow.


Belly (of bow), xxvi, 174, & passum.  Bek-and-claw, see crossbow, Birjas, 76, 83
f., 180.

1530Bolts (for crossbows): 19, 25, 27 È, 29-30, 174; balance in, 30; kinds, 29;
length, 30; weight of head in, 30; socketed head, 30.

Bone: in arrows, xxiii; in thumb- guards, 34; in crossbow stock- nut, 88; in bow
handies, 161, 163; in string-bridges, 12.

1531BOW(S): xxiv-xxxi, 6-19, & passim ; see also bracing height, cast, crossbow(s),
discharge velocity, draught, draw-weight, recovery.

Backed, xxv, 6, 10; Hejazi, to.  ite, xxvi ff., 6 fL, 175, & passim;
Construction, 17-16, & Figs. 7-10, Dimensions, comparative: 16 f.  Distortions
and their corrections: 99 f., 118, 121; a fundamental, 37; heat treatment, 91,
99, 121,

1532
Measuring, mode of, 17, 22,

Painting and varnishing, xxvi, 8, 1$, 16.

1533Parts and nomenclature: 7 (Fig. 5) 8, tx f, & Fig. 7, 90, 161 f. & Fig. 54, 174;
see also arrow-pass, back, belly, dustar, grip, ibranjak, neck, siyah.

Reflex (-ed): xxvii, 13, 204 n. 14; grip, 15.

1534Syriam Mameluke (Taybugha’s fahiah): 7 ff; manufacture, parts, specifications,
&c. 8, r2, 196 n. 5*; time taken to make 15 f., dimensions analysed, 16 f.;
reconstruction, r70 f., Pi. r8.

Types (by function): flight, 6, 8, 17 f., 104, 110, 196 n. 8, 197 n. 3% practice
(kabbád), 152; warjtarget, xxxix, r8, & passim; (by region): Arabian, 10;
Asiatic, $4, 175, & passim; Avar, 163; Bashkir, 17; Hejazi ‘intermediate’, ro;
Indian, xxvi (Fig. 22), xxix (Fig, 2d), 1r, 17; Iraqi, z7; Khorasanian, 6, 17,
60; Magyar, 163; Manchu, xxvii (Fig. 2b), xxix; Middle Eastern, 45, & passim;
Mongo- lan, xxviii f., & Fig. 2c; Persian, xl n, r3 (Sasanid design in Syria),
6, 10 f, r1, 15, 17; Sino-Tatar,. xxvii ff., & Figs, 2b & c, 11; Syrian
Mameluke, see above; Turkish (including Ottoman flight), ro £., 14 f., 17, 155.

1535Hand: 6; merits and otherwise as opposed to crossbow, xxxi f, I97 ü. IG!,

Hejazi ( fila, sharij, &c.), ro f,

1536Munfasiiak : 6.


Sclf: xxv, f., 176; Arab, 6, 16 f.

1537Veneering, xxvi, 8, 15.

W'asittyyah, 6, 10, 193.

1538Waterproofing, r5 f.

Weighing, 20 f. & Fig. 21; sze also draw-weight,

1539Bowcase, 20, 174.

Bowstring, see string.

1540Bow-weight, see draw-weight.

Bowyers: Cairene, 156; Turkish, r6,

1541Boxwood (in crossbow), 8,

Bracer, 120.

1542Bracing, 8, go-roo; a fundamental or not, 37, 41, 90; methods: concealed, 96;
military, 90 f. & Fig. 31; pressure, 96; sleeve, 97; ‘of the archers’, 97; ‘of
the fleeing archer’, 96; ‘of the lone archer’, 97; ‘of the wound- ed archer’,
96; on horseback, 91 f, & Fig. 32, 97; in squatting position, 92 f. & Fig. 33,
204 n. 14; in water, 94, 96 £., with drawing-strap 94 f. & Fig, 37, 204 n. 20;
with assistants, 92 f. & Fig. 34; of flight bow, 8; of stiff bow 94 f.  &
Fig. 36, Aba Hashim’s, 130; at-Tabari's, r32; aids to: former(ga/ab), 91,
bracing-board (kharkuman}, 93 f. & Fig. 35, 98 f., strap (barshag), 93, 99.

Bracing-board, see above.

1543Bracing-height, 22 f., 98, 175.

Brazil-woad, ros, 108.

1544Breast (of arrow), £74.

Brigandine, 26, r98 n. Ir.

1545Broadhead, 174; see also arrow,

Bunduz, 19, 139 £.; see also pellets.

1546Butts, 79.


Cairo weight, 160.

1547Cast (of bow): xxv, xxvii, 175, 196 n. 47; effects of string on, 20 f., 197
n. 3!, of loops on, 22, of fietchings on, 27, of thumb- guard on, 34, of string
position on, 53, of follow-through on, 68, 201 n. ro; in flight bow, 197 n. 3!.

Cathayan, see strings.

1548Chadara tenax (wood), 188.

Clench, 40 f.; see also locking

1549Climate, effects of: on bows, 17, 94, 197 n. IO!, on their manu- facture, 196
n.5*, on fletchings, 198 n.26; see also atmospheric conditions,

Composite, see bows, crossbows.

1550Conduct (of archers), t 52-58.

Copper: inarrow-guide, 140, 207.6; in thumb-ring, 199 n.7, 205 n.7*.

1551Core (of composites), tr ff.

Cornelian Cherry (wood), 108.

1552Cornus mas (wood). 6,

Counting, finger-, 5; ff.

1553Crcep (-ing), see draw.


Crescent (formation in drawing hand at loose), 64, 131.

1554Crossbow(s): xxx if. & Figs. 3 & 4, 6, 18 f. & Fig. 11, 29 f., 85 ff. & Fig. 30,
196 n.9; merits and otherwise, xxxi f., 9, $9, 197 n.10; construction:
composite, xxxii; 19, wooden, 8, IB f3 string, 21, 197 9.7; mechanism and
operation: nut, xxxii (Fig.  4), 24, 86, 88 f., clip, 86 (Fig.  30), spring, 89,
trigger, 88 f., self-cocking, 36, 89, belt-and- claw, 85 & Fig. 29, 88 £.;
types: ‘aggdr, 29 f., bandüg, 8, 19 £., jarkh, 8, 19, 88, 184, lagshah
(Maghrebi), 8, 19, mukliulak, 28, 198 n.37, naval, 8 f, 19, 197 n.10', ri&àb
(stirrup), 29 f., 85 f., 184, zanbürak, 8, 19.

Crossbow-makers, xxiv,

1555Cubit, 159 f., & passim.

Cupping-point, r16, 120.

1556
Damascus weight, 160,

Darts: types and sizes (dawdan] Gidani, husbGn, jaréd, *usfüri), 29, 148 ff.;
weight, 149; weight of head, 28; balance, 27 f.; range and use in warfare, 29.
150; their advantages, r45 ff.

1557Devices, 137 ff. (razor-, nockless arrows, incendiaries, &c.).

Dirham, 159 f., & passim.

1558Discharge velocity (of bow), xxxix, 18; and bracing height, 23.  Distances
(flight shooting), 109 f.;

see also range.

1559Distortions (in bows), see bow.

Draught (bow/arrow), 44, 46, 56 f., 66, 175; see also draw, drawing.

1560Draw (see also, draught, drawing): full (wafa’), 20, $7, 175, & passim,
‘greater’ (w.mhäyak, hashf* bayád), 20, $7, 104, 123, 129, 129, F31 fi, 193;
‘lesser’ (w.bidáyah), 57. 123, 129 fi, 193; ‘standard’ (kifayah), 57, 129:
‘internal’, 116 f., 120, 185; length of, 27, 116 f; creep (ing), 57; 57, I12,
175, 194; ‘snatching’, 67; Abū Hashim's, 130; Tàáhir's, Isbáq's, 731; at-
Tabari's, 132, 134.

Drawing: xxv, 56-57, 64, 66 f.; a fundamental, 37, 49 f£, with thumb-ring/guard,
36; methods XXV, $7; anchor-points and terminology, 122 ff, in military archery,
127; and posture, 102, 124; elbows in, $6 f., 112, 120, 200 n.1; with
arrow-guide, 146 f., 148 (Fig. 52b}; with crossbow, 8s f.; in flight shooting,
44, 46, 104; on horseback, 73, 75, 83, 202 1.28; see also overdrawing.

1561
INULA Ur SUBJELILS


Drawing-ring, see thumb-ring.

1562Drawing-strap, 85 & Fig. 29.

Draw-weight: xxv, xxvii, xxxi, 175; to ascertain, 20 f., 197 n.5}; related to
arrows and range, 30.

1563‘Dropping limb’, 16r.

Dustar, 8, r1 ff., 16 fL, 104, 161 £., & passim.

1564
Egg-and-pellet device, 139 f. & Fig.  49, 207 n.16.  Equitation, 71 f.


Farkah, see loose

1565Faults and remedies, &c., 33, 66£., I1I—21, 135, 199 n.5?, 205 n.7*,

Feathers, see arrows.

1566Finger (measure), 160.

Finger-reckoning, 167-69, Figs. 56 & $7.

1567Fire-power, 142.

Fisher loose, 54 f., 175.

1568Fist (measure), 160.

Fletchings, see arrows.

1569Flight shooting: xxxiii, 29, 104-10, 113; Ottoman, xxxiii, 29, 106 ff., 113,
119; in Cairo, 109 f.; with thumb-ring, 36; grasp, 44 & Fig. 20, 45, 199 n.33;
position, stance, elevation, draw, 104; lock, 105; loose, 64, 66 f., 105;
follow-through, 106; advant- ages and otherwise of, 105; aids, 106, IIO, II3;
training device, 156; atmospheric con- ditions, 105, 108; markers, 109;
distances (Egypt, Turkey, U.S.A.), 109 f., cheating, 105; see also arrows, bows.

Follow-through: 4r, 68-70, 135, 146, 201 n.10, Figs. 26 & 46; fathah
bi-sh-shamál, 41 ; khatrah, 68 ff, 123, 130 f, of Abū Hashim, Tahir, Ishaq, r30
f.; half-khatrah, 123, with arrow- guide, 146; on horseback, 73.

1570Former (gdlab), 91.

Fortress, shooting from top of, 137, 140.

1571Furiistyyah, 202 n.3.


Ghunyah, see under hirab.

1572Ghunyat al-muràami, xxxvi,

Gluc: in bows, xxvi, 6, rr ff, 17; in strings, xxxi, 20, 19? n.2!.

1573Gourd-shooting, see qabag.

Grasp (-ing): 42-48. 69 £., a funda- mental, 37, 40 f.; oblique, 43 & Vig. 19,
46, 122 fi., 128 f. & Fig. 44, 130 ff.; square, 43 & Fig. 19, 45, 118, 122, 124
f., 128 f, & Fig. 44, 130; inter- mediate, 43 & Fig. 19, 46, 120; grasp of ‘13’,
of '30', 44, of ‘990’, 43; in flight shooting (‘faicon’s talons’) 44 & Fig. 20,
46; ‘shortening the long’!  ‘lengthening the short’, 123;

1574
21I


and the hhajrah foliow-through’ 69 f. & Fig. 26; for long, short men, I28 f.,
for medium, 129; and Abū [ashim, Tahir, Ishaq, 130 f., at-Tabari, 132, 134.

1575Great Masters (of archery), xxxiv, 37-40, 199 n.2*; on funda- mentals, 40 f.,
their systems, 130-35.

Grewia poplifcha (wood), 6.

1576Grip (of composite bow): 8 f., 11 £., 16 f., & passim; inspection and adjustment
of, 9, 43 f, 125, 199 n.27; marn of, 42 ff.; bone in, 161, 163; see also handle.

Grip (of hand on bow), see grasp (-ing).

1577Grouping, sze arrows.

Guige, 102.

1578Gum arabic (in strings), 22.


Handle (of bow); 6, II, 15, 45; see also grip.

1579Hashimi cubit, 8, 159.

Heat treatment (of bows), see bows.

1580Helmets: Turkish and Persian, 132; and posture, 132 & Fig, 46.

Hemp (in crossbow string), 197 n.7'*.

1581Hide (in strings), 22.

Horn: (in bows): Arab, 6. 10, composite, xxvi, 1r, 73 Ê, Iraqi, 17, ears of
Persian and Turkish, 1$; in clip/spring of crossbow, $86, 89, 146; in sectional
arrow, 105, 108; in siper, 106; in thumb-guards, 34, 199 n.64; in
string-bridges, 12.

1582Horse-archers: xxii, xxv, xxxix, 71-89; their dexterity, 78; their
effectiveness, 142; aĉ- coutrements, 71 f., 79 ff.; mode of bracing. 91 f. &
Fig. 32, 97, 203 n.12; their use of crossbow, 8s ff.; their forms of shooting:
80-82 & Fig. 28. 202 n.24. © fore, 73 ff., 80, to rear, 74 f. & Fig. 27, 80, 202
n.24, down- ward, 73 f., 79f., horizontally, 74, 79, 80, upward 74 ff., 8o, ‘at
a slant’ (gighaj), 71, 73 f., 78 £, So ff., 172 f., 'gourd' (qabag), 71, 73,
ff., 77 f 80, 172 f., from back of neck (jarmaki), 75, 80, 82 f., from under
horse's neck, 75, 80; see also jarmaki, qabaq- shooting, gighaj- shooting.

Horse-hair (bowstrings), 22.

1583
Ibranjab, 14 f. & Fig. 9, & passim,

Imams of archery, see Great Masters.

1584Incendiary devices, 139 f., 143 f., 207 n.16.

Injuries (to archer from self} and causes, xxix, 33, 43 f., SI, 65, 9C, 99,
III-Z[, 146, 201 n.I2, 208 n.7*.

1585lvory {in crossbow nut), 88.


=

1586
Jarmaki : etymology, 82; technique, 75, 83, Pl14, 202 n8; its advantages, 140.

J'ulbah devices, 139 £. & Fig. 47, 206 n.13, 207 n.I6.

1587
Khatrah, see follow-through.

Khorasanian weight, 88,

1588Kitáb ghwryar af-tullab, xxxv ff.,— al-idah, 132, —al-makhziin, 83,
—al-mukhassas, 10 & passim (quoted), —al-wadih, xxxiv, xxxix, & passim (quoted);
see also Bibliography.

Knots (of bowstring), see string.

1589
Lance, 71 f.

Lathe (of crossbow), xxxii; in relation to string, 2r.

1590Leather: on bow's grip, 9, 43; in Strings, xxix, 22, at nocking- point, 140; in
thumb-guards, 34 ff.

(in crossbow string), 197 n.71.

1591Lock(s): ‘20’, $5; ‘22’, $2 f. & Fig, 22; '23*, 55; '24', 54 E. ‘30’, ‘37 555
'38', 49; '63', '69', sx ff. & Fig. 22, 122 f., 167; "72^, $43 73, 53 f; ‘83’,
54; straight, oblique, 52 f, & Fig.  22, 55; ‘clinging’, $3; ‘pillion’ 52 f. &
Fig. 22, 55, threc- finger, 55, 102, 1:20; four- finger, 53; pre-Islamic Arab,
53; Korean, 119 f., Sasanid, 53 (Tig. 23); of Bahram, Chosroes, $2 ff & Fig. 22;
of Aba Háshim, Ishig, Tahir, 130 ff, of at- Tabari, 132, 134; see also loose
(—lock).

Locking: xxv, 51-55; a fundamental, 37, 40; arrow against grip, 47 ff. ; spasm
in, 51; string position in, 5$; pinching nock, 56, I17, II9, I2I; With
arrow-guide, I46, 149; see also lock, loose, release, thumb-iock,

1592Longbow, xxv, r10, 113, 176.

Longbowmen, xxxii.

1593see string.

Loose (loosing, release): 64-67, 176; a fundamental, 37, 40 Es essentials, 65;
clean, 55, ros, 204 n.6; consistent, 36, 55; fast, 53; slow, sluggish, 53, 65;
"held" (sat), 64.66 f., 201 n.2*; ‘outstretched’ (mutamatri), 66 f.. sharp, 65,
105, 204 n.6'; ‘snatched’ (mukhtalas), 64, 66 f, 20: n2'; ‘sprung’, 66; straight
(stavi), 66; cause of variations, 65; and lock, 65; creep, ‘forward loose’, 67;
disengagement with ‘twist’ (farkah), 64, 66 f., 130; with "crescent! {tailil),
64, 131; with ‘backward punch’, 65, 67, 201

1594
n.10; in combat, 64 f.; in target shooting, 64, 66; in flight shoeting, 64, 66
f., 105.  Loose (—lock): Fisher 54 f.; Flem- ish, 54; Mediterranean, 54 f., 129;
see also Mongolian relcase.


Mace, 71 f.  Majrd, see axrovr-guide.  Martingale, 7r f; in under horse's neck,
75; nature

1595
of, 79.  Mast, shooting at, see qabag-shooting Main, see grip.

aydān, xxiv, 28, 109; —al-qabaq,

1596——as-sibdg, 109.  Maydáni, see arrows.  Mediterranean loose, see loose.
Mukhassas, see under kirab.  Mushamma‘, 113, 119.


Nab' (wood), 6, 188.

1597Neck (of bow): 7 (Fig. 5), 8, 17, 195.

Nihàyah (Nihàyat as-su'T), xxxiv, & passim (quoted),

1598Nock; see arrows.

Nocking: 47-50, 56, 200 nn.3! & 6}, & passim; a fundamental, 37, 40 f; ‘clinging
lock’ in, 47; insertion of string, 49; position of nock against fingers, 49;
methods of Abü Hashim, Tahir, Ishaq, 130 ff, aj-Tabari, 134; with arrow-guide,
145 ff.; on horseback, 200 n.6!, 202 n.28.

1599Nocking-point, see string.

Novice, conduct of, &c., 152—758,

1600
Orange (wood), 8.  Overdrawing, 33, 46, 20I n.12.


Peliets: iron. 139 f. 143, 207 n.16; Clay, 207 n.16.

1601Posture: oblique, 124 f, 129 ff, 134; square/frontal, 124 f., 129; intermediate,
124, 129; of Abt Hashim, ‘Tahir, Ishaq, 130 f, of at-Tabari, 132, 134; and
drawing, 124 f. & Fig. 43; and helmets, armour, shields, 101 f., 125, 132 f.;
see also seat, stance.

Practice bag (torba), in flight shooting, r56;—drum (Pattiy- yah), 152, 156.

1602Pulley, to assess draw-weight, 20 f.


Qabag (gourd) -shooting: 71 fE., 77 f., 80 f., Plates 13-15; origins and
purpose, 78; under Mamelukes, 77 f, Persians, Turks, 78; requirements in horse
for, 76; state, orientation, and division of field for, 76 f.; nature and range
of target, 77 f., 172; height of mast, 78; arrow used 77; hazards, 76; tactics,
76 f, aids to practice in, 76; over-

1603
shooting mark, 74; see also horsc-archers, jarmaki,

Qighajigigaj-shooting (‘at a stant’): 7t, 73 fL, 77, 78 f, 8: f, 172-73, Pi.to;
origins and purpose, 79, 173; etymology, 172 f nature of target, 79, 172 f,
arrow used, 77; for details in common with gabag- shooting, see s.v.

1604Qintar, 160.

Qiga see giphaj. —

1605Qiràt, 159 f., & passim.

Quarrel, r9, 176.

1606Quivers, Chinese, 149.


Range: of target/war arrows, cross- bow bolts, darts, 30; and follow-through,
68.

1607Rail, 159 f., & passim.

Recovery, rate, speed of, 7, 18, 105 f., 176, 204 n.1*.

1608Recurve, 176.

Reed (in sectional arrow), 105, 108.

1609Reflex (-cd), see bow.

Reins, in shooting from horseback, 72 f., 75, 79 £., 85 £., 202 n.28.

1610Relaxation, points of, r11 ff,

Relaxed method, 1 13.

1611Release, 37, 40; Mongolian, 54; see loose.

‘Reserve draw', 55.

1612‘Retainer’ (mahbas), 72, 80.

Ring, archer’s see thumb-ring.

1613Riser, 11.


Sandarac: on bows, 16; on arrows,

1614
164.

Seat (squatting position): definition, 102; Oblique, 102 f., 116 fL, 122 ff,
130; square/frontal, 102 f, 122 f, 130 f; inter- mediate, ro2, 123; Andalusian,
Egyptian, Khorasanian, Persian, 103; ‘fencer’s’, innominate, ‘kings’ *, 103,
‘sprinter’s’, 102.

1615Self bow, see bow.

Semi-tension method, 1:3.

1616Shaft (of arrow), see arrow.

Shield, and shooting, ror f., 125.

1617‘Shooting limb', 74, 90, 161. it

Sighting, 58-63; synonymous wi aiming, 40; a fundamental, 7, 40; essentials in,
60; use of lights in, s8, 201 n.2'; and posture, 62, 122 f.; and eleva- tion,
60, 62 f; methods: askant/ ‘squint-cyed’, $8, 61, 179, of Abū Hashim, 130, of
Chosroes, 58, of at-Tabar, 134, of Japanese, 62, external, internal, 59 ff. &
Fig, 24, 122 fs 125, 130, with split vision, 59 £., 62, monocular, 58, 61, for
long, short range, $0; at stationary, moving horsemen, 137, 14! £5 see also
aiming.

1618
Silk: in bowstrings, xxix f., 8, 20, 22, 49, 197 n.2".

Sinew: in bows, xxvi, 6, ro £L, 13 fl, 17, 45; in arrows, 164 fL; in

1619
strings, xxix.

Siper, 46, 106 f. & Fig. 40, 110, 113; Ir9.

1620Siyah, xxviii f., 6, 8, 11 f. & Figs. 7 & 8, 16 f, & passim,

Snatched, see loose.

1621Snatching, see draw, and 176.

Somatic differences and technique 122-29; see also grasp, posture.

1622Span (measure), 160.

Spasm, 5r, 119.

1623Splices in composite, 11 £

Spurs, correct position for horse- archer, 72 f.

1624Stance (standing position): a funda- mental, 41; oblique, 101 f., 123 (Fig. 42),
131 (Fig. 45); square/frontal, — intcrinediate, tor f, I3f (Fig. 45); flight
shooting, IOI, 104; military, 101; target-shooting, 102.

Steel: in arrow-guide, 140; arrow- head, 26.

1625Stillness, points of, 111 ff.

Stirrup bow, 19;—crossbow, 85-89, 203 n.1!;—guide, 146 & Fig.  51, 150 f.

1626*Stonc of Jenghiz Khan’, 110,

String: xxix f. 20-23, 197 n.2!; preparation of, a fundamental,

1627
INDEX OF SUBJECTS


37; matching with bow, 91, 98; stretch, 22, 98; length, 2x f.; weight in war
bow, 20; in flight bow, 8, 20, 105, 197 7.3", in crossbow, 21, 197 nn.7, 9';
Cathayan, 20, 185, r97 n.2!, Persian, 20, 197 n.2!, Ottoman, Sino-Tatar, 197
m. 2°; early Turkish, 22; effects of thin, short, long, 21, 197 m.3!; of thick,
21, 25; loops 20 ff, in crossbow 21, 197 n.9'; loop-knots, 23 & Fig. 13, Pl 5;
nocking-point, 49, 56, 117, 140, 207 n.20; and lead weights, 105, 110; see also
glue, hide horse- hair, leather, silk, wax.

1628Suing-bridge, function in com- posites, xxix; nature of, 12.

String-stopper, 163.

1629Stringing, see bracing.

Switch, 73 £, & Fig. 27.

1630Syrian weight, 36, 88, 160, & passim.


Tabsirah (Tabyrat arbáb al-albàb), xxxiv, & passim (quoted).

1631Tahlil, see crescent,

Tang, 26, 198 n.15, 177.

1632Target ranges, 30, 141-

Telhis resdil er-rümat, xxxii, & passim (quoted).

1633‘Tendon, see sinew.

Tension, points of 111, ff.

1634Tension method, 113.


213

1635
Thumb-guards, xxv, 5, 34-36 & Fig.  I7, I19, I99 m.9; see also thumb-ring.

Thumb-lock: as opposed to finger loose, xxv, $4; military advant- age of, 102;
in flight shooting, 105; see also lock, locking.

1636Thumb-ring, xxv, 34 f., 205 8.7% see also thumb-guards.

Tillering, 15, 177-

1637Toxophilus, xxiv, & passim (quoted).

Trajectory, to test: £38, 141 f; in war, T41.

1638Tremor, r13, 116.


Ulki, 141.  Ugiyyah, 160.

1639
Wadih, see under kitáb,

Wasitiyyah, 6, ro.

1640Wax: in strings, xxix, 22, 197 1.2! ; in mushamma‘ of flight shooter, 13.

Weight, see draw-weight,

1641Weights and measures, 159-60.

Well, shooting enemy in, 137, 206 n,3*.

1642Wood: in bows, xxvi, 6, 8, 10 ff, & passim; in sectional arrows, 105; in arrows,
passim.

Wrist, meaning in Arabic, 204 n.2*.

1643
Yew, 8, 19.


INDEX OF PLACES AND PEOPLE

1644
(— before an entry indicates omission of ‘al’)


Abbasid(s), xxiii f., 39.  Abraham, 3, Abū Hashim al-Bawardi, 37, 39 f£, 45 f.,
48 f., 55, 62, 66, 102, 122, 129 f., 199 1.27, 206 n.10!, Acre, sieges of, 139,
143.  dam, 3.  Afghanistan, 39.  Ainslie, Sir Robert, 109.  Akbar (Emperor),
PL3.  Alfi Qàni Bak ash-Sharifi, xxxv, “Ali, 153, 208 n.16.  Anaxagoras, 110.
~—Aqsara’i, Muhammad, xxxiv.  Arabia, Arabians, xxiii, ro f.  bs, xxiii, 6, IO,
106; see also Beduin(s), Ardashir I 39, 200 n.I0, Arghün, rro.  Ascham, R,,
XXiv, 57, 126, 201 n.2!, —Ashraf Khalil (Sultan), T —Ashraf Sha‘bin (Sultan),
xxiv, xxxviii, Ayalon, D., xxiv, xxxiii, 77 f. 109.  Aydamir, 203 n.34.  ‘Ayn
Jalüt, battle of, xxiv.  Ayyübids, xxiii, Azdamir (Özdemir), 76, 203 n.34.

1645
Baer, G., 155.

Baghdad, xxiii, ro.

1646Bahram Gor (Vahram V), 37, 39, 46, 52 (Fig. 22€), 53, 59.

Bahri, Bahriyyah, xxiii f, xxxii, xl IL IO, 71, 202 n,!,

1647Balfour, H., 170.

Baikh, 39.

1648—Balkhi, see Tahir ai-Balkhi.

Barqüq (Sultan), xxiv,

1649Barsbay (Sultan), xxxv.

—Barfidi, 39,

1650—Biwardi, see Abū Hashim al- Bawardi.


Baybars I (Sultan), xxiv, 77; 143, 203 n.35.

1651—Baysari, Badr ad-Din (Amir), 78

Beduin(s), xxiii, ro,

1652Bertier, A, de, 83.

Boudot-Lamotte, A., xxxiv, xl n.29.

1653
I09,


—Bukhiri, 208 nn, 13, 21.  — Bunduqdiri, see Baybars.  Busbeca (Busbequius), 78
f.

1654
Cahen, C., XXxiv, 19.

Cairo, xxiv, 79, roo f.

1655California (State Flight Shoot), tog.

Caspian, 40,

1656Cathay, 20.

Caucasus, xxiv, xl n.16.

1657Central Asia, xxiii, 39, 78.

Chosroes (Persian Kings), 39, 53 f., 58, 201 ny2.

1658Circassian Mamelukes, xxiv, xl n.16, 77, 203 1.35.  panions, 71, 202 n.4,

Cordier, V., 83.

1659Crassus, xxiv,

Crusades, Crusaders, xxiii, 142 f.

1660
Damascus (weight), 159 f., & passim, Dárà (Darius, King), 200 n.6‘, Pl, 12.  Dhü
l-Aktàf, see Shapur I.

Drake, H., 109.

1661
Egypt, xxiii f, xl 1.I3, 103, I55; see also Cairo,

Elmer, R, P., xxxiii É, 14. 41, 55, 106, 120 f, 148, 159 f, 174, 196 n.4*, &
passim (quoted).

1662Elott, M. E., r19.

Emesa, x} 0,13.

1663English, xxxii, 3r.


Fabian, G., r4.

1664Farāwah, go.

—Faráwi, ‘Abd ar-Rahman, 40, 56, 200 n.34,

1665Faris, N. A., xxxiii, 14, 4I, 55, 106, 120 f., 148, 159, 196 n.4?.

Fazarah, Fazáti, 200 n.8?,

1666Fez, xl n.13,

Flinton, J., 16,

1667Franks, 8.


Gabriel (Archangel), 3: Giorgetti, G., 88, Guglielmini, A., 83.

1668
214


Haíqah, xxiv,

1669Hammcer-Purgstall, J. von, xxxiii,

Hansard, G. A., 31, 79.

1670—Harawi, 39

—Harawi, Muhammad ibn al-Hasan 96.

1671—Hasan, 64, 201 n.3*,

Heath, E. G., 15r.

1672Hein, J., xxxiii f., 106, 200 n.87; seg alio Mustafa Kani,

Hejaz, Hejazis, 6, 10.

1673Herat, 39.

Hims, xt n.13.

1674Hinz, W., 159.

Hulagu (Hüle'ü), xxiii, P144.

1675Huuri, K., xxxiv, x! 1.23, I9.


Ibil-Ishtar, xxvi.

1676Ibn Abi Hajalah, 195.

Ibn al-Fagih, xxiii.

1677Ton Hajar, xxxvi.

Ibn Majah, 208 nn.13 & 2r.

1678Ibn Sidah, 1o, 30.

Ibn Taghribirdi, 172.

1679Idris ibn Yahya, 64.

Tnàl (Sultan), xxxv.

1680Iran, Iranian (s), xxiii, 39; see Persia.

Iraq, Iraqis, xxiii, 6, 17, 160.

1681Isaac, 3.

Isfahan, 78. b

1682Ishaq ar-Raffa', 37, 39 f: 45 f.s 48{£, $5: 62, 66, 102, 123, 129, 131 f., 199
n.2*. 206 n.rọ'.

Ishmact, 3.

1683Istanbul, 109; see Ok Meydant,

—Jabarti, 156.

1684—Jahiz, xxiti.


Jamshid, 123, 205 n.6’.  Jānim al-Ashrafi, x! n. 39.  Japanese, 55, $7, 62, 11
3, 126,

1685
Kani, Mustafa, see Mustafa Kani, Kharezm, see Khwarizm.  Kharijites, xxiii.

Khiva, 40. - Khorasan, Khorasanian(s), xxiii, 6, 17, 39, 103, 133, 200 r.8*.

1686Khusraw (Chosroes I), 39.


INVEA Ur PLALES AND PEOPLE

1687
Khwarizm (or -azm), 40, 105.

—Khwarizmi, 4o,

1688Kipchak steppe, Kipchaks, xxiii f., 202 n.1

Kuzul Arvat, 40, 200 n.f*,

1689Klopsteg, P. E., xxxiii f., 32, 106, & passim (quoted),

Koreans, 119., 149 f.

1690
Leningrad, rro.  Lurful-Hug, A.L.S.M., xxxiv.


McEwen, E., 16, ro9, 170 f.

1691Maghreb, Maghrebi(s), 8, 146.

Mahmid II (Sultan), xxxiii.

1692Mamelukes, xxiii f., xl nn. 16, 20, & 21, 8, 71, 77, 106, 126, 202 n.1.

Manchester Museum, r6 f., 46, 106, 109, 149, 166.

1693—Magrizi, 172.

Mardi ibn ‘Ali ;- Tarsüst, xxxiv, 18, 22, 39, & passim (quoted).

1694—Maéawardi, 39.

Maydan al-Qabaq, 109,

1695Maydan as-Sibaq, 109.


Mayd4n-i Shah, Isfahan, 78.  Medina, 3.

1696Mehemmed, see Muhammad.  Mehmet, » » Merv, 39.

Meshed, 39.

1697
Mongolia, Mongols, xxiii f, 77.

Morocco, xl n.13.

1698Morse, E, S., xxv, 54.

Muhammad (Prophet), 3, 37, 125, 153 f., 208 n.13.

1699Muhammad II (Sultan), rog.

Murad II (Sultan), Pl.13.

1700Murda, see Mardi.

Muslim (Traditionist), 208 nn.13,

1701
2r.

Mustafa Kani, xxxiii, 14, 46, $4, 65 ff., 106, 108, 113, 419, 155 f., 20t n.4*,
205 n.3!, & passim (quoted).

1702
Naram-Sin, xxvi,

—Nasã’i, 208 n.13.

1703—Nāşir Muhammad (Sultan), xxiv.

Nishapur, 105, IIO.

1704North Africa, North Africans, 8 f.; see also Maghreb.


Nashirvan, Pl.ro.

1705
Odessa Museum, r1o.

Ok Meydani, Istanbul, 108 f, Olbia, 110,

1706Ortoman(s), xxxiii, 29, 67, 106 ff.  Oxus, 39.

Ozdemir, see Azdamhnr,

1707
Parthia, Parthians, xxv, 78.  Partington, J. R,, 144.  Payne-Gallwey, R., 14,
88.

Persia, Persian(s), xxiii, 6, 17, 20, 37; 40, 55, 62, 78, 102, 106, 125, 148;
see also Chosroes, Iran, Sasanids,

1708Phoenicians, Pl.9.

Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford, 10, 16.

1709Pope, S., 142.

Prophet, see Muhammad,

1710
Qadisiyyah, battle of, 206 n.3”.  Qalifin (Sultan), 77.

Qarawah, —Qardwi, 200 n. 8*.  Quraysh, 3.

1711
—Raffa', see Isháq ar-Raffa', Raqqah, 39.

Reinaud, M., 19, 156.

1712Ritter, H., xxxii,

Rome, xxiv.

1713
Sa'd ibn Abi Waqy4s, 56, 200 n.3,

—Saffah (Abu I-' Abbas), 64, 20I n.7.

1714Saladin, xxiii f., 18, 39.

Samarkand (-qand), 39.

1715—Samargandi (Muhammad ibn 'Isà) 3o f.

Sarakhs, -Sarakhsi, 39.

1716Sasanids, 37, 39, 53, 58; see also Iran, Persia.

Sayf ad-Din Azdamür, 203 n. 34.

1717Sayf ad-Din Baktüt (Amir), 109 f.

Sayf ad-Din Janim al-Malaki l- Ashrafi, xxxv.

1718Scanlon, G., xxxiii f., x} n. 23.


„Selim III (Sultan), 109.

1719
Seljuqs, xxiii.  Sha'ban, seg al-Ashraf Sha‘ban.  —Shafi‘ii (Jurist), $6, 200,
n.2*.  Sha-Sefi, 78.


215

1720
Shapur I (Dhü [-Aktaf), 40.

Simon, H. Ingo, 16; see also Man- chester Museum.

1721Skinner, D., 16.

Spain, Muslim, 9.

1722State Hermitage Museum, Lenin- grad, 110.

Syria, xxiii f., xi n.13, 7, 27, 39, 75, 88, 160.

1723
—Tabari (Ahmad ibn ‘Abd Allah Muhibb ad-Din), xxxiv, 37, 40 f 46, 56, 66, 132
ff, 148, 182 f., 199 nn.2? & 3%, 200 n.8!, & passim (quoted).

TJabaristan, 40, 206 n, rot.

1724Tahir al-Balkhi, 25, 30, 34, 37; 39 ff, 42 f.s 46, 48 £., §5, 60, 66, 88, IQI
f., 123, 129 fF., 159, 199 n.2* 206 n.1o!.

Tartars (Tatars), 78.

1725Taybugha (Author), xxiv, xxxci, & passim,

Termez, 39. *

1726—Tinnidhi, 39.

"Transoxiana, 39.

1727Tripoli (Syria), 76, 203 n.34.

Turkestan, 83.

1728Turkey, Turks, &c., xxiii, 6, 17, 26, 29, 44, 47 f’ 71, 77 £., 148, 202 n.1; see
Ottomans, Turk- mens.

Turkmenistan, 39 f., 200 0.8%.

1729Turkmens, xxiii, 34, 77 f.


Uhud, battle of, 3.  Umayyad(s), xxiii.  Uzbekistan, 39 f,

1730
Vahram, V, see Bahram Gir.


Wasit, 10.

1731Wasitis, 201 n.12, Willcox, R., 119.  William of Tyre, 142.


Yadin, Y., 170.  —Ya'qübi, xxiii, Yistingka, r110.

1732
Zajaczkowski, A., xxxiv,


INDEX OF TECHNICAL TERMS

1733
N.B. Readers should also consult the Ar.  include words which occur onty


Adhnáb, 181 ‘Ahd, 155 Ahdaf, 26, 164, 1&1 Ahwal, 58, 179 A’immah, 130, 179, 183
'Ajz, 166 Akhra'a, 179 Aktaf, 32 Aktdf, 32, 179. 198 n.19 Akuff, 32, 195 n.19
Ala s-zìnd, 194 ‘Almah, 41, 179, 183 “Ali, 26, 179 A4màji, 29, 164 Amájtyyah
(-àt), 77, 179, 198 n.10 ‘Amiid, 179, 197 n.8!  A ‘nag, 193 Anfad(h), 199 n.to
Angushtaneh, 199 n.2?  Angushtudnels, 199 n. 2 Anka, 7, 179, 188 “Agab, 8, 162
(Fig. 54), 179 ‘Aqabah, 161 ‘Agada, $4, 179 “Agd, 40 f., 51, $4, 179, 205 n.7!
» Bahrāmi, 53, 179 » Khisísjra(u)wdni, $3 f, 179 » al-luzfim, 47, 179 »
ar-radif, 53, $5, 179, 192 » Ar-Sagülibah, $3, 179 » at-tardif. $55, 192 »
thaléthah zca-sittin, 179 » s'ahita-sittin, 179 “Aggaba, 6, 179 'Aqqár, 29 f.
‘Agr, 112, 115, 179 Aguas, 189 Arhüi, s, 199 5.37 Asbag, 26 Asbdsalàári,
145. 179 Aşi az-zind, 194 Asra‘, 198 n.20 Atrad li-s-sahm. 6, 34, 179 “Awamid
as-1333. 109, 179 Awsal, 161, 179 Awtdr, 193 Awwal wafå’, 125, 193

1734
(Arabic, Persian, Turkish)


Awzdn, 27, 194 Ayyil, 199 n. 6!

1735
Badan, 24, 28, 47, 134, 180 Baghsaq, baghshaq, 204 n.16 Bahrémi, 53, 179, 180
Bandi, 8, 19, 180 Bagqam, 105, 180 Barids, 83 Barsaq, 180, 204 n.16 Barshaq, 93,
99, 180, 204 n.16 Batn, 91, 180, 193 Battiyyah, 152, 156, 180 Bayád 122 f., 127
ff., 180, 205 n.5?  Bayad ar-riji, 101, 180 Bayram Shah, 145, 180 Bayt, 147,
161, 180

» al-hagt, 161, 180

1736s hatt al-watr, 161

» al-isgat, 16r, 180

1737» al-yad, 180 f.  Basiah, 30, 180 Bidáyah, $7, 123, 127 ff., 180, 185 Birjà:,
xxiii, 76, 83, 180 Biriin, 143, 180 Bunduq, 19, 139, 180 Burjas, 83 Butiin, 180


Chang al-baz, 46 Changal-i báz, 44, 180 Charkh, 184

1738Chelik, 14, 182

Chillah, 20, 180, 197 n.r!  Chula, 180

1739
Daffah, daffatáni, 134, 180

Daffard l-füq, 161, 186

1740Dakhil, dükhili, min dàhhil al-gas, 62, 185

Dastedh, 181

1741Dawarn, 7, 1381

Dav:ian, 148 £., 181

1742Daymak, see dinak

Destgih, 100, 181

1743Dhakar, 15í

Dhanab, 181

1744
216


abic-English Glossary (pp. 178-94) as this index does NOT once as main entries
of the Glossary

1745
Dhird', 159, 181, & passim » al-'amal an-najjdri, 1$1 » al-amal li-n-najjdrin,
x81 » at-Háshimi, 131 Dihdn, 8, 181 Dimak, 113, 161 f., 181 Dirham, 159 f., 181,
& passtin Düdan, 181 Diidani, 29, 149, 164, 181 Dustdr, 8, 11 ff., 16 ff., t6r
f., 181, & passim » ar-rijl, B, 081 » al-yad, 8, 181


Fahtah, 7, 18x

1746Fa'idah, 206 n.10!

Fardtodn, 164 & Fig. 55

1747Fardzdn, 164

Fard, r61 £, 181

1748Faris, 202 nn. 1, 3

Farkah, 64, 66 f., 130, 135, 181, 188

1749Fathah, fathah bi-sh-shamàl, 41, 181

Fauq, 161

1750Filg, 10, 181

Füg, 24, 47, 117; 130, 164, 181, 184, 205 n.8!, 206 n.ro"

1751Fursdn, 202 n.1

Puri’ ( ar-ramy), 4c

1752Furiisiyyah 202 n.3.

Futür ai-ildg, 113, 181

1753FusodQ, 134, 181


Gez, 47

1754Ghazál, 32 Ghilmünyyah, 206 n.1o!  Ghizldn, 32, 181


Hadaf, 28, 181 » tümàn, 141, FSI Wadd an-nafaah bi-I-iiláqg, 157, 204 n.6 Hafw,
165 Haiag, 134, 182 Haláwat al-jadhb, (7), 182 Halgah, 8, 164, 182 Hanmilat
al-haykal, 85 Hagw, 164 £

1755
BAVA de sh SL


Harbi, 28, 182

1756Harrafa, 182

Hashimi, 8, 159, 182 Hatt, 161

1757Hawwala, 182

Haydari, 26, 29, 197 n.9* Hayli, 20, 182

1758Hazm, 8, 182

Hozwah, 164

1759Hir, rér

Hudiid, 161, 163

1760Husbán, 29, 148 fi., 154, 182


Ibranjah (Q9) , 14 f., 122 f., 130 f., 134, 161, 182, & passtm Idrar, 30, 182
Iflat, 40, $3, 182 Hàzah, £55 F., 182 Ikhlás (min al-watr), 182, 202 n.16
Ikktalasa, 64, 182 Ikhulás, 67, 182 Ikhtrvári, 37, 182 ‘Tiel, 20$ n.4!  Imam,
134, 183, 199 n.2* Infitag, 112 f., 183 » al-'aqd, 183 » &l-bam, 113, 185 »
al-gabdah, 112, 183 Inharafa, 124, 183 Inking", 113, 161, 183 Ingilab {al-gaws),
90, 183, 190 Ingilab al-fisad, 116, 183 Intigàb tld t-‘aldmah, 41, 183 Irri'ásh,
112, 115 Isbdsaldri, see asbdsaldri Isgát, 16r, 180 Istamfa, 46, 56, 183
Inifa,27, 183 I:tned', $3, 130, 183 I'tamada, 101, 183, 188 Tear, 41, 183
Itimad, 40, 183 Itlag, 40, 113, 180, 181, 183, 191

1761
Jabbadh, 85, & Fig. 29, 183 Jadhb, 27 Jaiasa, 183, 189 Jalsah murabba'ah, 103
Jaisat al-hárib, 102 » Gl-mulik, 103 a al-muthagif, 103 Jam‘, 10, 105, 183, 191
Jama‘a, 180, 183 Jami‘, 183 Janb, 45 Janwari, 29, 182, 183, 197-8 n.9' Jaràd,
29, 145, 149 f., 164, 184 Jarid, 83 Jarki, R, 18 Fig. 11, r9, 88, 146 f., 151,
I84, 197 n.g!, & passm Jarmuki'jarmuki, 82 Jarr ‘ald i-fam, 41 Jarràm, 152, 184
Jaü'ah, 34, 184 Jawmaki, 184 Jatzah, 24, 86, 147, 133, 1R4 Fila, rilá, 184, 197
n.1!


Jinkilbàz, 46, 180, 184

1762juibah, 139 f., 143, 184, 191, 206 n.13, 207 n.16

Juliis, 102, t83, 184, 189

1763
Kabak, 172, 189

Kabba (‘ald l-fiig), 117, 184

1764Kabbad, 152, 184

Kabid ai-qgaws, 64, 145, 161, 184

1765Kaff, 189, 194

Kandn, 98, 180, 185

1766Kanàür, 22, 184

Kashf" (i-)dayad, 20, 127 f.s 180, 184

1767Kaz (-àt), 27, 47, 130, 138, 181, 184, 206 n.10*

Kaz (arrow), 164

1768Kepdde, 208 n.3!

Khalanj, 105

1769Khám, 8, 26, 184

Kháne-ye kamán, 180

1770Khang, 56, 117, 184

Khárij, mn khürij al-qaws, 61, 184

1771Kharkionan, 93, 98, 185

Kharf, 24, 185, 197 1.6?

1772Khashab, 8, 30, 185

Khashabah, 75

1773Khafrah, 68 ff., 73, 185

Kha al-istiwa’, 130, 185

1774Ahattáf, 85, 185

Khayta'ah, 199 n.3!

1775Khita'ah, 185

Khudrud, 163

1776Rüurtüm, 86, 146, 185

Kines( y) ra(u)tvdni, 53 f., 185

1777ifayah, $7, 127, 129, 185

Kifag, 172, 189

1778Kizüntah, 165

Kulyardm, 164

1779Kursü', 205 n.8*

Rushtibān'kushtubân (-dt), 185, 199

1780
n.I

Kushtuwàün (-at), 34, 185 Kustibdnikustubün, 185, 199 n.1 Kugr, IĜI

1781Kuzzádz, 51, 119 Kycadjiky-haj, 172


Lab, 112, 185

1782Lakzah, 65, 185

Lagshak, 8, 19, 185

1783Lagi:ldji, 26, 138, 185, 187 Lavy (al-gaws) halgar", 8, 185 Favyrin, LIT, 185

Lihiut, R, 185, 193

1784Lud, 198 n.23

Luzhüb, 193 n.23

1785
Madd, 40, 56, 185 » Juxedal, 120, 185 4 fawidur, 64, 185 Alsdhdhib, 134 Audkhal,
164 Mafdgil, 161 Airah, 64, 66 f,. (86 Affi, 27. 186 Malibus, 72, 80, 186


A A;SOAAL IN E S473 45. K AS IS IVA OS

1786
217


Mabhtüt( ah), 161, 186 Majüri, 145, 186 f.  Mayjrá, 28, 30, 105 f., 145

1787
» as- i> 49

» min al-ibhàm, 186 Makbàl, 32 Makilat, 198 n.19 Makiül, 32

1788
Makyüi, 26, 32, 198 n.19 Manàsil, 123 f., 186 Maqàbid, 6, 186 Marma, 153, 186
Masdh, 128 Maskah Turkiyvah, 47 Masnü'ah, 10, 186 Massáh, 128 Matn, 42 f., 122
£., 130 f., 134, 164 f.  186 Mawddin, 186 Mawdi* at-tafaig, 49, 186 Mattür, 180,
186 Mayádin, 186 Maydàn, xxiv, 28, 109 » al-gabag, 109 p as-sibag, 109 m rawil,
14x Maydani (arrows), 25, 27 fL, 33.  164, 186, 190; (guide), 140 Mi'balah, 164
Midfa‘, 207 n.16 Mifgal, 193 Miftah, 147, 186 Mihbas, 186 Mijrdt, 28, 105 f.,
140, 145 Ê, 187 » al-khurfion, 146, 187 » — ar-rikàb, 146, 187 Mi'rad, 164, 166
Misáh, 122, 128 f.  m ( ai- )bayád, 123, 131, 187 » (al-)qabdah, 123, 127, ff.,
187 » (as-)sawad, 129, 131, 187 Mishgas, 164 Mismàr, 30 Misra‘, 164 Mu ‘ajjir,
161 Mu’ akikhar (al-'ayn), 58, 187 Mu'allim, 153, 155, 187, 208 n.12 Mu'agqab(
ah), 10, 187 Mubtadi 155, 208 n.12 Mudawwar, 179, 207 n.16 Mudtarib, 55, 187
Mujfawwag, 205 n.8' Muhalli!l, 64 Muharrif, 187 Mukattal, 32 Mukhtalas, 64, 66
f., 182, 187 Mukhuiah, 28, 187 Munádalah fi l-ahdaf, 164 Munahhar, 146, 187
Munfasilah, 6, 187, 193 Munhar, 187 Munhartf, 101, 122 Afuntahi, 155, 208 1.12
Muqaddam (al-'ayn) , $8, 187 Murabba', 103, 187 Murakkabah, 10, 187 Murayyash,
26, 187


Murràn, 6, 187

1789Murtafi*, 138, 185 Musadd4, 20

Musaddar, 24, 187 Mushaddad, 111, 187 Mushanina', 113, 119, 187 Musta‘an, 71, 79
f., 187 Mustalyi, 6, 187

1790Mustawi, 66, 138, 201 n.12 Mustawi n-nahkt, 24, 188 Mura‘allim, 153, 155, 188,
208 n.12 Mutamapti, 66 f.  Mutawajjih, 101, 188 Mutawassit, 101, 188


Nab‘, 6, 188 Nabi, 27, 30, 86, 145, 164, 188, 198 n. 27 Nablah, 188 Nadab, 26,
20, 188 Nafdah, 181. 188, 204 n.6 Nag, 25, 164 f.  » al-hadaf, r88 Naza‘a (fi
l-qaws), $8 Nazar 40, 58, 188 3 adakhit, 62 » khàárnj,ó61 Nibdl, 198 n.27
Niháyah, 57, 104, 123, 127 ff, 188 Niháyah, 3, 57, 123, 127, 188 Niydt, r61
Nushshab, 164, 188 Nusiil, 188 » al-ahdăf, 26, 188

1791
Qabag, 71, 77 f., 185, 189 Qabd, 40, 42, 189 Qabdah, 40, 127, 162, 186 »
muharrafah, 46 » murabba'ah, 45 Qabdat al-qatcs, 49 Qadib, 30 Qafala, 54, 189
Oaft, 19 Qaflah, 40, 54, 189 Oa’ dah, 206 n. 1a Qdlab[galib, 91, 189 »
ash-sha‘irah, 24, 189 is ash-sham ‘ah, 24; 189

Qalam, 28, 145, 164, 189 Qulansuwah, 161 Oalib, sce Qalab Qar'ah, 172 Qarqal,
26, 189, r98 n.11 Qasab, 105 Qasir, 28, 123, 189 Qaws al-bundug, 19

1792» ar-rjl, 6, 18, 88, 184, 18g

» qr-nkáb, 19, 29 f., 88

1793» al-yad, 6, 18g Qayghaj!gayaaj, 17 Qibad, 189 Qidh, 164 Dighajlqiqaj, 71, 79 fs
172 f., r89 Qintár, 86, 147, 160 Qirdt, 159, 189, & Passim Qirgil, 189


Qitryy as-sabg, 190

1794Qismat al-'aynayn, 62 Otyam, 101, 189

Otyam rij! al-gaws, 121, 189 Qubbád, 43, 46, 146, 189 Qudhdhadh, 164

1795
I Qu'id at-tahrif, 118, 192 Ouwwah, 3, 196 n.4?


Radif, $3, 55, 179, 189, 192 af, 8, r89 Rahb, 164 Rajaha, 189 Ràji'(ah), t6r,
189 Ramy as-sibág, 104, IQI Ragid, 53, 190 Ra’s, 164, 190 » n-nad, 134 Rasafah,
164 Rajl, 159 f., 190, & passim Rikdd, 29 f., 146 Rikabdàriyah, 202, n.8 Rish,
26, 190

1796
Rujà', 104, 190

Rukbah, r6r f.

1797Ruma, 189

Ru'z, 166 R Sabbdbah, 27, 190, 200 n.7!

1798
Sabgi, 29, 164, 190 Sadr, 30, 164, 166, 190 Safa'ih, 190, 198 nr Sahm, 30, 47,
164, 197 n.8!  » gasir, 28, 190 2 famdm, 20, 190 » Gl-hadof, 28 » — a -müs, 138,
190 » ds r9o ss fawil, 28, 183, 190 Säkin, 64, 66 f., 111, 183, 190 Salas
al-jadhb, r9o Sandarüs, 16 Sar-afsár, 79, 191 Sari* ar-rujü', 104, 190 Sat", 190
> Sawad, 112, 127 ff., 191, 205 n.5?  Sawa’, 190 Sayalan, 19x Saysarah, 20, 34,
94, 191, 204 n.20 Shah majrd/mijrat, 145, 146, 191 Shahaddah, 27, 112, 191, 200
n.7!  Shagg, 112, 115, 145 (‘slot’), 191 Sharij, 10 Sharijah, 164 f.  Sharkh
{-dmi), 164 Shawhar, 6, 187, 191 Shaykh, 155, 208 n.8 Shibr, 29, 191 Shiddak, 3,
196 2.4?  Shuqiig, 191 Sibàg, 20, 104, 109, 179, 193, 198 n.20 Sthdm, 7, 164,
190 Sildn, 26, 138, 191, 207 n.16 Siper, 46, 106, 107 (Fig. 40), 1ro, It3, IIQ,
19I Sirifsár, 71, 79, 191


Sisarah, scc saytarak

1799Siyah ( -ac), xxviii, 8, 161 fL, 191, & passo"

Sukün, 191


Ta'áliq as-suft/sift, 198 0.17
Tadmik, 56, 112, 116, 191
Tafwig, 40, 49, 134, 192
Taharraka, 25, 192
Tahlil, 131, 192
Tahrif, 53, 118
Tahrik as-sakin, 111
Talaga, 192
Talib, 152, 155
Talyin al-mushaddad, 111
Tamáàm, 27, 192
Taman, 123
Tagát, 192, 196 n.2*
Tags, 8, 192
Tagsir al-gasir, 189, 192
s — Gf-lavil, 123, 192
Taqwim al-i‘utjdi. 37
Taraf az-zind, 194
Tarbid, 205 ns"
Tarid, 179
” li-s-sahm, 53, 192
Tarjih, 8, 192
Targ, 56, 115, 192
Targi*, 193
Targumwah, 205 n.8?
Tashdid al-layyin, 11i
Tasmá|rasma', 140, 192
Tagwib as-sahm, 120 f., 192
Taswit, 120
Tatrif, 118, 192
Tarnwil al-qagir, 123, 189, 192
»  Gf-razil, x92
Tatwis, 8, 193
Tail, 28, 123, 190, 192 f.
Tazbid, 205 n.5*
Tazlig, 41, 193
Taznid, 112, 193, 205 n.5
Tirkásh, 184, 193
Torba, 156
Tamar, 164


'Ulamá' ar-ramy, 208 n.8
Ulki, 138, 141 f, 193

"^ Qajir, 193

Ulki, 141

*Ung, 162, 193

'Uqad, 193, 205 1.7!
*Ugdah, 29, 120, 193
Ügivyah, 160, 193

"Ugüd, $4, 179

‘Urwah, 162, 193

*Usfar, 161

"Usfüri, 29, 149, 164

Ustà, 155

Ustadiin}-in, 7. 73, 122; I93
Ustàád(h), 111, 155, 208 n.8
Usiti ar-ramy, 37, 199 0.3"
Urrah, 161, 164 f.


Waja’, 20, 57, 123, 180, 183, 193
»  baydd, 131, 180, 193


INDELA Ut


Wafa’ biddyah, 130, 180, 193

» mbdyah, 104, 188, 193

» tamümiramm, 44, 46, 183, 193
Wafirah, 166
Wajh (al-gaws), 91, (61, 195
Watara, 180
W'agif( ah), 53, 190, 193
Wasittyyah, 6, 193
Watr, 20, 162, 179, 193
Wazana, 60, 193


Wazn, 20, 60, 194


Yad (al-4azs), 90
Yaghlig, 28, 164, 194
Yaámür, 105, 194

Yasij, 77, 164, 193 n.28


Zafirah. 166
Zahr, 45, 162, 193, 194


1 ECHNICAL TERMS 219


Zanbtirak, 8, 19, 194
Zagq, 112, 194
Zaradah, 138, 194
Zardiyyah, 133

Zifr, 161

Zind, 194, 204 n.2*
Ziyár, 22

Zwfr, 161 f.

Zwuhür, 6, 194
Zurqah, 115, 194
